Happy is the man who does not go in the company of sinners, or take his place in the way of evil-doers, or in the seat of those who do not give honour to the Lord.
But whose delight is in the law of the Lord, and whose mind is on his law day and night.
He will be like a tree planted by the rivers of water, which gives its fruit at the right time, whose leaves will ever be green; and he will do well in all his undertakings.
The evil-doers are not so; but are like the dust from the grain, which the wind takes away.
For this cause there will be no mercy for sinners when they are judged, and the evil- doers will have no place among the upright,
Because the Lord sees the way of the upright, but the end of the sinner is destruction.A Psalm. Of David. When he went in flight from Absalom his son.
Lord, how greatly are they increased who make attacks on me! in great numbers they come against me.
Unnumbered are those who say of my soul, There is no help for him in God. (Selah.)
But your strength, O Lord, is round me, you are my glory and the lifter up of my head.
I send up a cry to the Lord with my voice, and he gives me an answer from his holy hill. (Selah.)
I took my rest in sleep, and then again I was awake; for the Lord was my support.
I will have no fear, though ten thousand have come round me, putting themselves against me.
Come to me, Lord; keep me safe, O my God; for you have given all my haters blows on their face-bones; the teeth of the evil-doers have been broken by you.
Salvation comes from the Lord; your blessing is on your people. (Selah.)To the chief music-maker on corded instruments. A Psalm. Of David.
Give answer to my cry, O God of my righteousness; make me free from my troubles; have mercy on me, and give ear to my prayer.
O you sons of men, how long will you go on turning my glory into shame? how long will you give your love to foolish things, going after what is false? (Selah.)
See how the Lord has made great his mercy for me; the Lord will give ear to my cry.
Let there be fear in your hearts, and do no sin; have bitter feelings on your bed, but make no sound. (Selah.)
Give the offerings of righteousness, and put your faith in the Lord.
There are numbers who say, Who will do us any good? the light of his face has gone from us.
Lord, you have put joy in my heart, more than they have when their grain and their wine are increased.
I will take my rest on my bed in peace, because you only, Lord, keep me safe.To the chief music-maker on wind instruments. A Psalm. Of David.
Give ear to my words, O Lord; give thought to my heart-searchings.
Let the voice of my cry come to you, my King and my God; for to you will I make my prayer.
My voice will come to you in the morning, O Lord; in the morning will I send my prayer to you, and keep watch.
For you are not a God who takes pleasure in wrongdoing; there is no evil with you.
The sons of pride have no place before you; you are a hater of all workers of evil.
You will send destruction on those whose words are false; the cruel man and the man of deceit are hated by the Lord.
But as for me, I will come into your house, in the full measure of your mercy; and in your fear I will give worship, turning my eyes to your holy Temple.
Be my guide, O Lord, in the ways of your righteousness, because of those who are against me; make your way straight before my face.
For no faith may be put in their words; their inner part is nothing but evil; their throat is like an open place for the dead; smooth are the words of their tongues.
Send them to destruction, O Lord; let their evil designs be the cause of their fall; let them be forced out by all their sins; because they have gone against your authority.
But let all those who put their faith in you be glad with cries of joy at all times, and let all the lovers of your name be glad in you.
For you, Lord, will send a blessing on the upright man; your grace will be round him, and you will be his strength.To the chief music-maker on corded instruments, on the Sheminith. A Psalm. Of David.
O Lord, do not be bitter with me in your wrath; do not send punishment on me in the heat of your passion.
Have mercy on me, O Lord, for I am wasted away: make me well, for even my bones are troubled.
My soul is in bitter trouble; and you, O Lord, how long?
Come back, O Lord, make my soul free; O give me salvation because of your mercy.
For in death there is no memory of you; in the underworld who will give you praise?
The voice of my sorrow is a weariness to me; all the night I make my bed wet with weeping; it is watered by the drops flowing from my eyes.
My eyes are wasting away with trouble; they are becoming old because of all those who are against me.
Go from me, all you workers of evil; for the Lord has given ear to the voice of my weeping.
The Lord has given ear to my request; the Lord has let my prayer come before him.
Let all those who are against me be shamed and deeply troubled; let them be turned back and suddenly put to shame.Shiggaion of David; a song which he made to the Lord, about the words of Cush the Benjamite.
O Lord my God, I put my faith in you; take me out of the hands of him who is cruel to me, and make me free;
So that he may not come rushing on my soul like a lion, wounding it, while there is no one to be my saviour.
O Lord my God, if I have done this; if my hands have done any wrong;
If I have given back evil to him who did evil to me, or have taken anything from him who was against me without cause;
Let my hater go after my soul and take it; let my life be crushed to the earth, and my honour into the dust. (Selah.)
Come up, Lord, in your wrath; be lifted up against my haters; be awake, my God, give orders for the judging.
The meeting of the nations will be round you; take your seat, then, over them, on high.
The Lord will be judge of the peoples; give a decision for me, O Lord, because of my righteousness, and let my virtue have its reward.
O let the evil of the evil-doer come to an end, but give strength to the upright: for men's minds and hearts are tested by the God of righteousness.
God, who is the saviour of the upright in heart, is my breastplate.
God is the judge of the upright, and is angry with the evil-doers every day.
If a man is not turned from his evil, he will make his sword sharp; his bow is bent and ready.
He has made ready for him the instruments of death; he makes his arrows flames of fire.
That man is a worker of evil; the seed of wrongdoing has given birth to deceit.
He has made a hole deep in the earth, and is falling into the hole which he has made
His wrongdoing will come back to him, and his violent behaviour will come down on his head.
I will give praise to the Lord for his righteousness; I will make a song to the name of the Lord Most High.To the chief music-maker on the Gittith. A Psalm. Of David.
O Lord, our Lord, whose glory is higher than the heavens, how noble is your name in all the earth!
You have made clear your strength even out of the mouths of babies at the breast, because of those who are against you; so that you may put to shame the cruel and violent man.
When I see your heavens, the work of your fingers, the moon and the stars, which you have put in their places;
What is man, that you keep him in mind? the son of man, that you take him into account?
For you have made him only a little lower than the gods, crowning him with glory and honour.
You have made him ruler over the works of your hands; you have put all things under his feet;
All sheep and oxen, and all the beasts of the field;
The birds of the air and the fish of the sea, and whatever goes through the deep waters of the seas.
O Lord, our Lord, how noble is your name in all the earth!To the chief music-maker on Muthlabben. A Psalm. Of David.
I will give you praise, O Lord, with all my heart; I will make clear all the wonder of your works.
I will be glad and have delight in you: I will make a song of praise to your name, O Most High.
When my haters are turned back, they will be broken and overcome before you.
For you gave approval to my right and my cause; you were seated in your high place judging in righteousness.
You have said sharp words to the nations, you have sent destruction on the sinners, you have put an end to their name for ever and ever.
You have given their towns to destruction; the memory of them has gone; they have become waste for ever.
But the Lord is King for ever: he has made ready his high seat for judging.
And he will be the judge of the world in righteousness, giving true decisions for the peoples.
The Lord will be a high tower for those who are crushed down, a high tower in times of trouble;
And those who have knowledge of your name will put their faith in you; because you, Lord, have ever given your help to those who were waiting for you.
Make songs of praise to the Lord, whose house is in Zion: make his doings clear to the people.
When he makes search for blood, he has them in his memory: he is not without thought for the cry of the poor.
Have mercy on me, O Lord, and see how I am troubled by my haters; let me be lifted up from the doors of death;
So that I may make clear all your praise in the house of the daughter of Zion: I will be glad because of your salvation.
The nations have gone down into the hole which they made: in their secret net is their foot taken.
The Lord has given knowledge of himself through his judging: the evil-doer is taken in the net which his hands had made. (Higgaion. Selah.)
The sinners and all the nations who have no memory of God will be turned into the underworld.
For the poor will not be without help; the hopes of those in need will not be crushed for ever.
Up! O Lord; let not man overcome you: let the nations be judged before you.
Put them in fear, O Lord, so that the nations may see that they are only men. (Selah.)Why do you keep far away, O Lord? why are you not to be seen in times of trouble?
The evil-doer in his pride is cruel to the poor; let him be taken by the tricks of his invention.
For the evil-doer is lifted up because of the purpose of his heart, and he whose mind is fixed on wealth is turned away from the Lord, saying evil against him.
The evil-doer in his pride says, God will not make a search. All his thoughts are, There is no God.
His ways are ever fixed; your decisions are higher than he may see: as for his haters, they are as nothing to him.
He has said in his heart, I will not be moved: through all generations I will never be in trouble.
His mouth is full of cursing and deceit and false words: under his tongue are evil purposes and dark thoughts.
He is waiting in the dark places of the towns: in the secret places he puts to death those who have done no wrong: his eyes are secretly turned against the poor.
He keeps himself in a secret place like a lion in his hole, waiting to put his hands on the poor man, and pulling him into his net.
The upright are crushed and made low, and the feeble are overcome by his strong ones.
He says in his heart, God has no memory of me: his face is turned away; he will never see it.
Up! O Lord; let your hand be lifted: give thought to the poor.
Why has the evil-doer a low opinion of God, saying in his heart, You will not make search for it?
You have seen it; for your eyes are on sorrow and grief, to take it into your hand: the poor man puts his faith in you; you have been the helper of the child who has no father.
Let the arm of the sinner and the evil-doer be broken; go on searching for his sin till there is no more.
The Lord is King for ever and ever; the nations are gone from his land.
Lord, you have given ear to the prayer of the poor: you will make strong their hearts, you will give them a hearing:
To give decision for the child without a father and for the broken-hearted, so that the man of the earth may no longer be feared.For the chief music-maker. Of David.
In the Lord put I my faith; how will you say to my soul, Go in flight like a bird to the mountain?
See, the bows of the evil-doers are bent, they make ready their arrows on the cord, so that they may send them secretly against the upright in heart.
If the bases are broken down, what is the upright man to do?
The Lord is in his holy Temple, the Lord's seat is in heaven; his eyes are watching and testing the children of men.
The Lord puts the upright and the sinner to the test, but he has hate in his soul for the lover of violent acts.
On the evil-doer he will send down fire and flames, and a burning wind; with these will their cup be full.
For the Lord is upright; he is a lover of righteousness: the upright will see his face.For the chief music-maker on the Sheminith. A Psalm. Of David.
Send help, Lord, for mercy has come to an end; there is no more faith among the children of men.
Everyone says false words to his neighbour: their tongues are smooth in their talk, and their hearts are full of deceit.
The smooth lips and the tongue of pride will be cut off by the Lord.
They have said, With our tongues will we overcome; our lips are ours: who is lord over us?
Because of the crushing of the poor and the weeping of those in need, now will I come to his help, says the Lord; I will give him the salvation which he is desiring.
The words of the Lord are true words: like silver tested by fire and burned clean seven times.
You will keep them, O Lord, you will keep them safe from this generation for ever.
The sinners are walking on every side, and evil is honoured among the children of men.To the chief music-maker. A Psalm. Of David.
Will you for ever put me out of your memory, O Lord? will your face for ever be turned away from me?
How long is my soul to be in doubt, with sorrow in my heart all the day? how long will he who is against me be given power over me?
Let my voice come before you, and give me an answer, O Lord my God; let your light be shining on me, so that the sleep of death may not overtake me;
And he who is against me may not say, I have overcome him; and those who are troubling me may not be glad when I am moved.
But I have had faith in your mercy; my heart will be glad in your salvation.
I will make a song to the Lord, because he has given me my reward.To the chief music-maker. Of David.
The foolish man has said in his heart, God will not do anything. They are unclean, they have done evil works; there is not one who does good.
The Lord was looking down from heaven on the children of men, to see if there were any who had wisdom, searching after God.
They have all gone out of the way together; they are unclean, there is not one who does good, no, not one.
Have all the workers of evil no knowledge? they take my people for food as they would take bread; they make no prayer to the Lord.
Then were they in great fear: for God is in the generation of the upright.
You have put to shame the thoughts of the poor, but the Lord is his support.
May the salvation of Israel come out of Zion! when the fate of his people is changed by the Lord, Jacob will have joy and Israel will be glad.A Psalm. Of David.
Lord, who may have a resting-place in your tent, a living-place on your holy hill?
He who goes on his way uprightly, doing righteousness, and saying what is true in his heart;
Whose tongue is not false, who does no evil to his friend, and does not take away the good name of his neighbour;
Who gives honour to those who have the fear of the Lord, turning away from him who has not the Lord's approval. He who takes an oath against himself, and makes no change.
He who does not put out his money at interest, or for payment give false decisions against men who have done no wrong. He who does these things will never be moved.Michtam. Of David.
Keep me safe, O God: for in you I have put my faith.
O my soul, you have said to the Lord, You are my Lord: I have no good but you.
As for the saints who are in the earth, they are the noble in whom is all my delight.
Their sorrows will be increased who go after another god: I will not take drink offerings from their hands, or take their names on my lips.
The Lord is my heritage and the wine of my cup; you are the supporter of my right.
Fair are the places marked out for me; I have a noble heritage.
I will give praise to the Lord who has been my guide; knowledge comes to me from my thoughts in the night.
I have put the Lord before me at all times; because he is at my right hand, I will not be moved.
Because of this my heart is glad, and my glory is full of joy: while my flesh takes its rest in hope.
For you will not let my soul be prisoned in the underworld; you will not let your loved one see the place of death.
You will make clear to me the way of life; where you are joy is complete; in your right hand there are pleasures for ever and ever.A Prayer. Of David.
Let my cause come to your ears, O Lord, give attention to my cry; give ear to my prayer which goes not out from false lips.
Be my judge; for your eyes see what is right.
You have put my heart to the test, searching me in the night; you have put me to the test and seen no evil purpose in me; I will keep my mouth from sin.
As for the works of men, by the word of your lips I have kept myself from the ways of the violent.
I have kept my feet in your ways, my steps have not been turned away.
My cry has gone up to you, for you will give me an answer, O God: let your ear be turned to me, and give attention to my words.
Make clear the wonder of your mercy, O saviour of those who put their faith in your right hand, from those who come out against them.
Keep me as the light of your eyes, covering me with the shade of your wings,
From the evil-doers who are violent to me, and from those who are round me, desiring my death.
They are shut up in their fat: with their mouths they say words of pride.
They have made a circle round our steps: their eyes are fixed on us, forcing us down to the earth;
Like a lion desiring its food, and like a young lion waiting in secret places.
Up! Lord, come out against him, make him low, with your sword be my saviour from the evil-doer.
With your hand, O Lord, from men, even men of the world, whose heritage is in this life, and whom you make full with your secret wealth: they are full of children; after their death their offspring take the rest of their goods.
As for me, I will see your face in righteousness: when I am awake it will be joy enough for me to see your form.To the chief music-maker. Of the servant of the Lord, of David, who said the words of this song to the Lord on the day when the Lord made him free from the hand of all his haters, and from the hand of Saul; and he said,
I will give you my love, O Lord, my strength.
The Lord is my Rock, my walled town, and my saviour; my God, my Rock, in him will I put my faith; my breastplate, and the horn of my salvation, and my high tower.
I will send up my cry to the Lord, who is to be praised; so will I be made safe from those who are against me.
The cords of death were round me, and the seas of evil put me in fear.
The cords of hell were round me: the nets of death came on me.
In my trouble my voice went up to the Lord, and my cry to my God: my voice came to his hearing in his holy Temple, and my prayer came before him, even into his ears.
Then trouble and shock came on the earth; and the bases of the mountains were moved and shaking, because he was angry.
There went up a smoke from his nose, and a fire of destruction from his mouth: flames were lighted by it.
The heavens were bent, so that he might come down; and it was dark under his feet.
And he went in flight through the air, seated on a storm-cloud: going quickly on the wings of the wind.
He made the dark his secret place; his tent round him was the dark waters and thick clouds of the skies.
Before his shining light his dark clouds went past, raining ice and fire.
The Lord made thunder in the heavens, and the voice of the Highest was sounding out: a rain of ice and fire.
He sent out his arrows, driving them in all directions; by his flames of fire they were troubled.
Then the deep beds of the waters were seen, and the bases of the world were uncovered, because of your words of wrath, O Lord, because of the breath from your mouth.
He sent from on high, he took me, pulling me out of great waters.
He made me free from my strong hater, and from those who were against me, because they were stronger than I.
They came on me in the day of my trouble; but the Lord was my support.
He took me out into a wide place; he was my saviour because he had delight in me.
The Lord gives me the reward of my righteousness, because my hands are clean before him.
For I have kept the ways of the Lord; I have not been turned away in sin from my God.
For all his decisions were before me, and I did not put away his laws from me.
And I was upright before him, and I kept myself from sin.
Because of this the Lord has given me the reward of my righteousness, because my hands are clean in his eyes.
On him who has mercy you will have mercy; to the upright you will be upright;
He who is holy will see that you are holy; but to the man whose way is not straight you will be a hard judge.
For you are the saviour of those who are in trouble; but eyes full of pride will be made low.
You, O Lord, will be my light; by you, my God, the dark will be made bright for me.
By your help I have made a way through the wall which was shutting me in; by the help of my God I have gone over a wall.
AsforGod, hiswayiscompletelygood; thewordoftheLordistested; heisabreastplate for all those who put their faith in him.
For who is God but the Lord? or who is a Rock but our God?
God puts a strong band about me, guiding me in a straight way.
He makes my feet like roes' feet, and puts me on high places.
He makes my hands expert in war, so that a bow of brass is bent by my arms.
You have given me the breastplate of your salvation: your right hand has been my support, and your mercy has made me great.
You have made my steps wide under me, so that my feet are kept from slipping.
I go after my haters and overtake them; not turning back till they are all overcome.
I will give them wounds, so that they are not able to get up: they are stretched under my feet.
For I have been armed by you with strength for the fight: you have made low under me those who come out against me.
By you their backs are turned in flight, so that my haters are cut off.
They were crying out, but there was no one to come to their help: even to the Lord, but he gave them no answer.
Then they were crushed as small as dust before the wind; they were drained out like the waste of the streets.
You have made me free from the fightings of the people; you have made me the head of the nations: a people of whom I had no knowledge will be my servants.
From the time when my name comes to their ears they will be ruled by me: men of other countries will, with false hearts, put themselves under my authority.
They will be wasting away, they will come out of their secret places shaking with fear.
The Lord is living; praise be to my Rock, and let the God of my salvation be honoured.
It is God who sends punishment on my haters, and puts peoples under my rule.
He makes me free from my haters; I am lifted up over those who come up against me: you have made me free from the violent man.
Because of this I will give you praise, O Lord, among the nations, and will make a song of praise to your name.
Great salvation does he give to his king; he has mercy on the king of his selection, David, and on his seed for ever.To the chief music-maker. A Psalm. Of David.
The heavens are sounding the glory of God; the arch of the sky makes clear the work of his hands.
Day after day it sends out its word, and night after night it gives knowledge.
There are no words or language; their voice makes no sound.
Their line has gone out through all the earth, and their words to the end of the world. In them has he put a tent for the sun,
Who is like a newly married man coming from his bride-tent, and is glad like a strong runner starting on his way.
His going out is from the end of the heaven, and his circle to the ends of it; there is nothing which is not open to his heat.
The law of the Lord is good, giving new life to the soul: the witness of the Lord is certain, giving wisdom to the foolish.
The orders of the Lord are right, making glad the heart: the rule of the Lord is holy, giving light to the eyes.
The fear of the Lord is clean, and has no end; the decisions of the Lord are true and full of righteousness.
More to be desired are they than gold, even than much shining gold; sweeter than the dropping honey.
By them is your servant made conscious of danger, and in keeping them there is great reward.
Who has full knowledge of his errors? make me clean from secret evil.
Keep your servant back from sins of pride; let them not have rule over me: then will I be upright and free from great sin.
Let the words of my mouth and the thoughts of my heart be pleasing in your eyes, O Lord, my strength and my salvation.To the chief music-maker. A Psalm. Of David.
May the Lord give ear to you in the day of trouble; may you be placed on high by the name of the God of Jacob;
May he send you help from the holy place, and give you strength from Zion;
May he keep all your offerings in mind, and be pleased with the fat of your burned offerings; (Selah.)
May he give you your heart's desire, and put all your purposes into effect.
We will be glad in your salvation, and in the name of our God we will put up our flags: may the Lord give you all your requests.
Now am I certain that the Lord gives salvation to his king; he will give him an answer from his holy heaven with the strength of salvation in his right hand.
Some put their faith in carriages and some in horses; but we will be strong in the name of the Lord our God.
They are bent down and made low; but we have been lifted up.
Come to our help, Lord: let the king give ear to our cry.To the chief music-maker. A Psalm. Of David.
The king will be glad in your strength, O Lord; how great will be his delight in your salvation!
You have given him his heart's desire, and have not kept back the request of his lips. (Selah.)
For you go before him with the blessings of good things: you put a crown of fair gold on his head.
He made request to you for life, and you gave it to him, long life for ever and ever.
His glory is great in your salvation: honour and authority have you put on him.
For you have made him a blessing for ever: you have given him joy in the light of your face.
For the king has faith in the Lord, and through the mercy of the Most High he will not be moved.
Your hand will make a search for all your haters; your right hand will be hard on all those who are against you.
You will make them like a flaming oven before you; the Lord in his wrath will put an end to them, and they will be burned up in the fire.
Their fruit will be cut off from the earth, and their seed from among the children of men.
For their thoughts were bitter against you: they had an evil design in their minds, which they were not able to put into effect.
Their backs will be turned when you make ready the cords of your bow against their faces.
Be lifted up, O Lord, in your strength; so will we make songs in praise of your power.To the chief music-maker on Aijeleth-hash-shahar. A Psalm. Of David.
My God, my God, why are you turned away from me? why are you so far from helping me, and from the words of my crying?
O my God, I make my cry in the day, and you give no answer; and in the night, and have no rest.
But you are holy, O you who are seated among the praises of Israel.
Our fathers had faith in you: they had faith and you were their saviour.
They sent up their cry to you and were made free: they put their faith in you and were not put to shame.
But I am a worm and not a man; cursed by men, and looked down on by the people.
I am laughed at by all those who see me: pushing out their lips and shaking their heads they say,
He put his faith in the Lord; let the Lord be his saviour now: let the Lord be his saviour, because he had delight in him.
But it was you who took care of me from the day of my birth: you gave me faith even from my mother's breasts.
I was in your hands even before my birth; you are my God from the time when I was in my mother's body.
Be not far from me, for trouble is near; there is no one to give help.
A great herd of oxen is round me: I am shut in by the strong oxen of Bashan.
I saw their mouths wide open, like lions crying after food.
I am flowing away like water, and all my bones are out of place: my heart is like wax, it has become soft in my body.
My throat is dry like a broken vessel; my tongue is fixed to the roof of my mouth, and the dust of death is on my lips.
Dogs have come round me: I am shut in by the band of evil-doers; they made wounds in my hands and feet.
I am able to see all my bones; their looks are fixed on me:
They make a division of my robes among them, by the decision of chance they take my clothing.
Do not be far from me, O Lord: O my strength, come quickly to my help.
Make my soul safe from the sword, my life from the power of the dog.
Be my saviour from the lion's mouth; let me go free from the horns of the cruel oxen.
I will give the knowledge of your name to my brothers: I will give you praise among the people.
You who have fear of the Lord, give him praise; all you seed of Jacob, give him glory; go in fear of him, all you seed of Israel.
For he has not been unmoved by the pain of him who is troubled; or kept his face covered from him; but he has given an answer to his cry.
My praise will be of you in the great meeting: I will make my offerings before his worshippers.
The poor will have a feast of good things: those who make search for the Lord will give him praise: your heart will have life for ever.
All the ends of the earth will keep it in mind and be turned to the Lord: all the families of the nations will give him worship.
For the kingdom is the Lord's; he is the ruler among the nations.
All the fat ones of the earth will give him worship; all those who go down to the dust will make themselves low before him, even he who has not enough for the life of his soul.
A seed will be his servant; the doings of the Lord will be made clear to the generation which comes after.
They will come and make his righteousness clear to a people of the future because he has done this.A Psalm. Of David.
The Lord takes care of me as his sheep; I will not be without any good thing.
He makes a resting-place for me in the green fields: he is my guide by the quiet waters.
He gives new life to my soul: he is my guide in the ways of righteousness because of his name.
Yes, though I go through the valley of deep shade, I will have no fear of evil; for you are with me, your rod and your support are my comfort.
You make ready a table for me in front of my haters: you put oil on my head; my cup is overflowing.
Truly, blessing and mercy will be with me all the days of my life; and I will have a place in the house of the Lord all my days.A Psalm. Of David.
The earth is the Lord's, with all its wealth; the world and all the people living in it.
For by him it was based on the seas, and made strong on the deep rivers.
Who may go up into the hill of the Lord? and who may come into his holy place?
He who has clean hands and a true heart; whose desire has not gone out to foolish things, who has not taken a false oath.
He will have blessing from the Lord, and righteousness from the God of his salvation.
This is the generation of those whose hearts are turned to you, even to your face, O God of Jacob. (Selah.)
Let your heads be lifted up, O doors; be lifted up, O you eternal doors: that the King of glory may come in.
Who is the King of glory? The Lord of strength and power, the Lord strong in war.
Let your heads be lifted up, O doors; let them be lifted up, O you eternal doors: that the King of glory may come in.
Who is the King of glory? The Lord of armies, he is the King of glory. (Selah.)Of David.
To you, O Lord, my soul is lifted up.
OmyGod, Ihaveputmyfaithinyou, letmenotbeshamed; letnotmyhatersbeglorying over me.
Let no servant of yours be put to shame; may those be shamed who are false without cause.
Make your steps clear to me, O Lord; give me knowledge of your ways.
Be my guide and teacher in the true way; for you are the God of my salvation; I am waiting for your word all the day.
O Lord, keep in mind your pity and your mercies; for they have been from the earliest times.
Do not keep in mind my sins when I was young, or my wrongdoing: let your memory of me be full of mercy, O Lord, because of your righteousness.
Good and upright is the Lord: so he will be the teacher of sinners in the way.
He will be an upright guide to the poor in spirit: he will make his way clear to them.
All the ways of the Lord are mercy and good faith for those who keep his agreement and his witness.
Because of your name, O Lord, let me have forgiveness for my sin, which is very great.
If a man has the fear of the Lord, the Lord will be his teacher in the way of his pleasure.
His soul will be full of good things, and his seed will have the earth for its heritage.
The secret of the Lord is with those in whose hearts is the fear of him; he will make his agreement clear to them.
My eyes are turned to the Lord at all times; for he will take my feet out of the net.
Be turned to me, and have mercy on me; for I am troubled and have no helper.
The troubles of my heart are increased: O take me out of my sorrows.
Give thought to my grief and my pain; and take away all my sins.
See how those who are against me are increased, for bitter is their hate of me.
O keep my soul, and take me out of danger: let me not be shamed, for I have put my faith in you.
For my clean and upright ways keep me safe, because my hope is in you.
Give Israel salvation, O God, out of all his troubles.Of David.
O Lord, be my judge, for my behaviour has been upright: I have put my faith in the Lord, I am not in danger of slipping.
Put me in the scales, O Lord, so that I may be tested; let the fire make clean my thoughts and my heart.
For your mercy is before my eyes; and I have gone in the way of your good faith.
I have not taken my seat with foolish persons, and I do not go with false men.
I have been a hater of the band of wrongdoers, and I will not be seated among sinners.
I will make my hands clean from sin; so will I go round your altar, O Lord;
That I may give out the voice of praise, and make public all the wonders which you have done.
Lord, your house has been dear to me, and the resting-place of your glory.
Let not my soul be numbered among sinners, or my life among men of blood;
In whose hands are evil designs, and whose right hands take money for judging falsely.
But as for me, I will go on in my upright ways: be my saviour, and have mercy on me.
I have a safe resting-place for my feet; I will give praise to the Lord in the meetings of the people.Of David.
The Lord is my light and my salvation; who is then a cause of fear to me? the Lord is the strength of my life; who is a danger to me?
When evil-doers, even my haters, came on me to put an end to me, they were broken and put to shame.
Even if an army came against me with its tents, my heart would have no fear: if war was made on me, my faith would not be moved.
One prayer have I made to the Lord, and this is my heart's desire; that I may have a place in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, looking on his glory, and getting wisdom in his Temple.
For in the time of trouble he will keep me safe in his tent: in the secret place of his tent he will keep me from men's eyes; high on a rock he will put me.
And now my head will be lifted up higher than my haters who are round me: because of this I will make offerings of joy in his tent; I will make a song, truly I will make a song of praise to the Lord.
O Lord, let the voice of my cry come to your ears: have mercy on me, and give me an answer.
When you said, Make search for my face, my heart said to you, For your face will I make my search.
Let not your face be covered from me; do not put away your servant in wrath; you have been my help: do not give me up or take your support from me, O God of my salvation.
When my father and my mother are turned away from me, then the Lord will be my support.
Make your way clear to me, O Lord, guiding me by the right way, because of my haters.
Do not give me into their hands, because false witnesses have come out against me, and men breathing destruction.
I had almost given up my hope of seeing the blessing of the Lord in the land of the living.
Let your hope be in the Lord: take heart and be strong; yes, let your hope be in the Lord.Of David.
My cry goes up to you, O Lord, my Rock; do not keep back your answer from me, so that I may not become like those who go down into the underworld.
Give ear to the voice of my prayer, when I am crying to you, when my hands are lifted up to your holy place.
Do not take me away with the sinners and the workers of evil, who say words of peace to their neighbours, but evil is in their hearts.
Give them the right reward of their acts, and of their evil doings: give them punishment for the works of their hands, let them have their full reward.
Because they have no respect for the works of the Lord, or for the things which his hands have made, they will be broken down and not lifted up by him.
May the Lord be praised, because he has given ear to the voice of my prayer.
The Lord is my strength and my breastplate, my heart had faith in him and I am helped; for this cause my heart is full of rapture, and I will give him praise in my song.
The Lord is their strength, and a strong place of salvation for his king.
Be a saviour to your people, and send a blessing on your heritage: be their guide, and let them be lifted up for ever.A Psalm. Of David.
Give to the Lord, you sons of the gods, give to the Lord glory and strength.
Give to the Lord the full glory of his name; give him worship in holy robes.
The voice of the Lord is on the waters: the God of glory is thundering, the Lord is on the great waters.
The voice of the Lord is full of power; the voice of the Lord has a noble sound.
By the voice of the Lord are the cedar-trees broken, even the cedars of Lebanon are broken by the Lord.
He makes them go jumping about like a young ox; Lebanon and Sirion like a young mountain ox.
At the voice of the Lord flames of fire are seen.
At the voice of the Lord there is a shaking in the waste land, even a shaking in the waste land of Kadesh.
At the voice of the Lord the roes give birth, the leaves are taken from the trees: in his Temple everything says, Glory.
The Lord had his seat as king when the waters came on the earth; the Lord is seated as king for ever.
The Lord will give strength to his people; the Lord will give his people the blessing of peace.A Psalm. A Song at the blessing of the House. Of David.
I will give you praise and honour, O Lord, because through you I have been lifted up; you have not given my haters cause to be glad over me.
O Lord my God, I sent up my cry to you, and you have made me well.
O Lord, you have made my soul come again from the underworld: you have given me life and kept me from going down among the dead.
Make songs to the Lord, O you saints of his, and give praise to his holy name.
For his wrath is only for a minute; in his grace there is life; weeping may be for a night, but joy comes in the morning.
When things went well for me I said, I will never be moved.
Lord, by your grace you have kept my mountain strong: when your face was turned from me I was troubled.
My voice went up to you, O Lord; I made my prayer to the Lord.
What profit is there in my blood if I go down into the underworld? will the dust give you praise, or be a witness to your help?
Give ear to me, O Lord, and have mercy on me: Lord, be my helper.
By you my sorrow is turned into dancing; you have taken away my clothing of grief, and given me robes of joy;
So that my glory may make songs of praise to you and not be quiet. O Lord my God, I will give you praise for ever.To the chief music-maker. A Psalm. Of David.
In you, O Lord, have I put my hope; let me never be shamed; keep me safe in your righteousness.
Let your ear be turned to me; take me quickly out of danger; be my strong Rock, my place of strength where I may be safe.
For you are my Rock and my strong tower; go in front of me and be my guide, because of your name.
Take me out of the net which they have put ready for me secretly; for you are my strength.
Into your hands I give my spirit; you are my saviour, O Lord God for ever true.
I am full of hate for those who go after false gods; but my hope is in the Lord.
I will be glad and have delight in your mercy; because you have seen my trouble; you have had pity on my soul in its sorrows;
And you have not given me into the hand of my hater; you have put my feet in a wide place.
Have mercy on me, O Lord, for I am in trouble; my eyes are wasted with grief, I am wasted in soul and body.
Mylifegoesoninsorrow, andmyyearsinweeping; mystrengthisalmostgonebecause of my sin, and my bones are wasted away.
Because of all those who are against me, I have become a word of shame to my neighbours; a cause of shaking the head and a fear to my friends: those who saw me in the street went in flight from me.
I have gone from men's minds and memory like a dead man; I am like a broken vessel.
False statements against me have come to my ears; fear was on every side: they were talking together against me, designing to take away my life.
But I had faith in you, O Lord; I said, You are my God.
The chances of my life are in your hand; take me out of the hands of my haters, and of those who go after me.
Let your servant see the light of your face; in your mercy be my saviour.
Let me not be shamed, O Lord, for I have made my prayer to you; let the sinners be shamed, and let their mouths be shut in the underworld.
Let the false lips be shut, which say evil against the upright, looking down on him in their pride.
O how great is your grace, which you have put in store for your worshippers, and which you have made clear to those who had faith in you, before the sons of men!
You will keep them safe in your house from the designs of man; in the secret of your tent will you keep them from angry tongues.
May the Lord be praised, because he has made clear to me the wonder of his grace in a strong town.
And as for me, I said in my fear, I am cut off from before your eyes; but you gave ear to the voice of my prayer, when my cry went up to you.
O have love for the Lord, all you his saints; for the Lord keeps safe from danger all those who are true to him, and gives the workers of pride their right reward.
Put away fear and let your heart be strong, all you whose hope is in the Lord.Of David. Maschil.
Happy is he who has forgiveness for his wrongdoing, and whose sin is covered.
Happy is the man in whom the Lord sees no evil, and in whose spirit there is no deceit.
When I kept my mouth shut, my bones were wasted, because of my crying all through the day.
For the weight of your hand was on me day and night; my body became dry like the earth in summer. (Selah.)
I made my wrongdoing clear to you, and did not keep back my sin. I said, I will put it all before the Lord; and you took away my wrongdoing and my sin. (Selah.)
For this cause let every saint make his prayer to you at a time when you are near: then the overflowing of the great waters will not overtake him.
You are my safe and secret place; you will keep me from trouble; you will put songs of salvation on the lips of those who are round me. (Selah.)
I will give you knowledge, teaching you the way to go; my eye will be your guide.
Do not be like the horse or the ass, without sense; ...
The sinner will be full of trouble; but mercy will be round the man who has faith in the Lord.
Be glad in the Lord with joy, you upright men; give cries of joy, all you whose hearts are true.Be glad in the Lord, O doers of righteousness; for praise is beautiful for the upright.
Give praise to the Lord on the corded instrument; make melody to him with instruments of music.
Make a new song to him; playing expertly with a loud noise.
For the word of the Lord is upright, and all his works are certain.
His delight is in righteousness and wisdom; the earth is full of the mercy of the Lord.
By the word of the Lord were the heavens made; and all the army of heaven by the breath of his mouth.
He makes the waters of the sea come together in a mass; he keeps the deep seas in store-houses.
Let the earth be full of the fear of the Lord; let all the people of the world be in holy fear of him.
For he gave the word, and it was done; by his order it was fixed for ever.
The Lord undoes the designs of the nations; he makes the thoughts of the peoples without effect.
TheLord'spurposeiseternal, thedesignsofhisheartgoonthroughallthegenerations of man.
Happy is the nation whose God is the Lord; and the people whom he has taken for his heritage.
The Lord is looking down from heaven; he sees all the sons of men;
From his house he keeps watch on all who are living on the earth;
He makes all their hearts; their works are clear to him.
A king's salvation is not in the power of his army; a strong man does not get free by his great strength.
A horse is a false hope; his great power will not make any man free from danger.
See, the eye of the Lord is on those in whose hearts is the fear of him, on those whose hope is in his mercy;
To keep their souls from death; and to keep them living in time of need.
Our souls are waiting for the Lord; he is our help and our salvation.
For in him our hearts have joy; in his holy name is our hope.
Let your mercy be on us, O Lord, as we are waiting for you.Of David. When he made a change in his behaviour before Abimelech, who sent him away, and he went.
I will be blessing the Lord at all times; his praise will be ever in my mouth.
My soul will say great things of the Lord: the poor in spirit will have knowledge of it and be glad.
O give praise to the Lord with me; let us be witnesses together of his great name.
I was searching for the Lord, and he gave ear to my voice, and made me free from all my fears.
Let your eyes be turned to him and you will have light, and your faces will not be shamed.
This poor man's cry came before the Lord, and he gave him salvation from all his troubles.
The angel of the Lord is ever watching over those who have fear of him, to keep them safe.
By experience you will see that the Lord is good; happy is the man who has faith in him.
Keep yourselves in the fear of the Lord, all you his saints; for those who do so will have no need of anything.
The young lions are in need and have no food; but those who are looking to the Lord will have every good thing.
Come, children, give attention to me; I will be your teacher in the fear of the Lord.
What man has a love of life, and a desire that his days may be increased so that he may see good?
Keep your tongue from evil, and your lips from words of deceit.
Be turned from evil, and do good; make a search for peace, desiring it with all your heart.
The eyes of the Lord are on the upright, and his ears are open to their cry.
The face of the Lord is against those who do evil, to take away the memory of them from the earth.
The cry of the upright comes before the Lord, and he takes them out of all their troubles.
The Lord is near the broken-hearted; he is the saviour of those whose spirits are crushed down.
Great are the troubles of the upright: but the Lord takes him safely out of them all.
He keeps all his bones: not one of them is broken.
Evil will put an end to the sinner, and those who are haters of righteousness will come to destruction.
The Lord will be the saviour of the souls of his servants, and no one who has faith in him will be put to shame.Of David.
O Lord, be on my side against those who are judging me; be at war with those who make war against me.
Be a breastplate to me, and give me your help.
Take up your spear and keep back my attackers; say to my soul, I am your salvation.
Let them be overcome and put to shame who make attempts to take my soul; let those who would do me damage be turned back and made foolish.
Let them be like dust from the grain before the wind; let the angel of the Lord send them in flight.
Let their way be dark and full of danger; let them be troubled by the angel of the Lord.
For without cause they have put a net ready for me secretly, in which to take my soul.
Let destruction come on them without their knowledge; let them be taken themselves in their secret nets, falling into the same destruction.
And my soul will have joy in the Lord; it will be glad in his salvation.
All my bones will say, Lord, who is like you? The saviour of the poor man from the hands of the strong, of him who is poor and in need from him who takes his goods.
False witnesses got up: they put questions to me about crimes of which I had no knowledge.
They gave me back evil for good, troubling my soul.
But as for me, when they were ill I put on the clothing of sorrow: I went without food and was sad, and my prayer came back again to my heart.
My behaviour was as if it had been my friend or my brother: I was bent low in grief like one whose mother is dead.
But they took pleasure in my trouble, and came together, yes, low persons came together against me without my knowledge; they never came to an end of wounding me.
Like men of deceit they put me to shame; the voice of their wrath was loud against me.
Lord, how long will you be looking on? take my soul from their destruction, my life from the lions.
I will give you praise in the great meeting; I will give you honour among a strong people.
Do not let my haters be glad over me falsely; let not those who are against me without cause make sport of me.
Fortheydonotsaywordsofpeace; intheirdeceittheyaredesigningevilthingsagainst the quiet ones in the land.
Their mouths were open wide against me, and they said, Aha, aha, our eyes have seen it.
You have seen this, O Lord; be not unmoved: O Lord, be not far from me.
Be awake, O Lord, be moved to take up my cause, my God and my Lord.
Be my judge, O Lord my God, in your righteousness; do not let them be glad over me.
Let them not say in their hearts, So we will have it: let them not say, We have put an end to him.
Let all those who take pleasure in my troubles be shamed and come to nothing: let those who are lifted up against me be covered with shame and have no honour.
Let those who are on my side give cries of joy; let them ever say, The Lord be praised, for he has pleasure in the peace of his servant.
And my tongue will be talking of your righteousness and of your praise all the day.To the chief music-maker. Of the servant of the Lord. Of David.
The sin of the evil-doer says in his heart, There is no fear of the Lord before his eyes.
For he takes comfort in the thought that his sin will not be uncovered and hated.
In the words of his mouth are evil and deceit; he has given up being wise and doing good.
He gives thought to evil on his bed; he takes a way which is not good; he is not a hater of evil.
Your mercy, O Lord, is in the heavens, and your strong purpose is as high as the clouds.
Your righteousness is like the mountains of God; your judging is like the great deep; O Lord, you give life to man and beast.
How good is your loving mercy, O God! the children of men take cover under the shade of your wings.
The delights of your house will be showered on them; you will give them drink from the river of your pleasures.
For with you is the fountain of life: in your light we will see light.
O let there be no end to your loving mercy to those who have knowledge of you, or of your righteousness to the upright in heart.
Let not the foot of pride come against me, or the hand of the evil-doers put me out of my place.
There the workers of evil have come down: they have been made low, and will not be lifted up.Of David.
Do not be angry because of the wrongdoers, or have envy of the workers of evil.
For they will quickly be cut down like grass, and become dry like the green plants.
Have faith in the Lord, and do good; be at rest in the land, and go after righteousness.
So will your delight be in the Lord, and he will give you your heart's desires.
Put your life in the hands of the Lord; have faith in him and he will do it.
And he will make your righteousness be seen like the light, and your cause like the shining of the sun.
Take your rest in the Lord, waiting quietly for him; do not be angry because of the man who does well in his evil ways, and gives effect to his bad designs.
Put an end to your wrath and be no longer bitter; do not give way to angry feeling which is a cause of sin.
For the evil-doers will be cut off: but those who have faith in the Lord will have the earth for their heritage.
For in a short time the evil-doer will be gone: you will go searching for his place, and it will not be there.
But the gentle will have the earth for their heritage; they will take their delight in peace without measure.
The sinner has evil designs against the upright, lifting up the voice of wrath against him.
He will be laughed at by the Lord, who sees that his day is coming.
The evil-doers have taken out their swords, their bows are bent; for crushing the poor, and to put to death those who are upright in their ways.
But their swords will be turned into their hearts, and their bows will be broken.
The little which the good man has is better than the wealth of evil-doers.
For the arms of the evil-doers will be broken: but the Lord is the support of the good.
The days of the upright are numbered by the Lord, and their heritage will be for ever.
They will not be shamed in the evil time, and in the days when all are in need of food they will have enough.
But the wrongdoers will come to destruction, and the haters of the Lord will be like the fat of lambs, they will be burned up; they will go up in smoke, and never again be seen.
The sinner takes money and does not give it back; but the upright man has mercy, and gives to others.
Those who have his blessing will have the earth for their heritage; but those who are cursed by him will be cut off.
The steps of a good man are ordered by the Lord, and he takes delight in his way.
Even if he has a fall he will not be without help: for the hand of the Lord is supporting him.
I have been young, and now am old, but I have not seen the good man without help, or his children looking for bread.
All the day he is ready to have mercy and to give; his children are a blessing.
Be turned from evil, and do good; and your place will be for ever.
For the Lord is a lover of righteousness, and takes care of his saints; they will be kept safe for ever; but the seed of the evil-doers will be cut off.
The upright will have the earth for their heritage, and will go on living there for ever.
The mouth of the good man says words of wisdom; the talk of his tongue is of righteousness.
The law of his God is in his heart; he will never make a false step.
The sinners are watching the upright man, desiring to put him to death.
The Lord will not give him into their hands, or be against him when he is judged.
Be waiting for the Lord, and keep his way; and you will be lifted up, and have the land for your heritage: when the evil-doers are cut off, you will see it.
I have seen the evil-doer in great power, covering the earth like a great tree.
But he came to an end, and there was no sign of him; I made a search for him and he was not there.
Give attention to the good man, and take note of the upright; because the end of that man is peace.
But as for the sinners, they will be cut off together; the end of the wrongdoers is destruction.
But the Lord is the saviour of the upright: he is their strength in the time of trouble.
And the Lord will be their help, and keep them safe: he will take them out of the hands of the evil-doers, and be their saviour, because they had faith in him.A Psalm. Of David. To keep in memory.
O Lord, be not bitter with me in your wrath; let not your hand be on me in the heat of your passion.
For your arrows have gone into my flesh, and I am crushed under the weight of your hand.
My flesh is wasted because of your wrath; and there is no peace in my bones because of my sin.
For my crimes have gone over my head; they are like a great weight which is more than my strength.
My wounds are poisoned and evil-smelling, because of my foolish behaviour.
I am troubled, I am made low; I go weeping all the day.
For my body is full of burning; all my flesh is unhealthy.
I am feeble and crushed down; I gave a cry like a lion because of the grief in my heart.
Lord, all my desire is before you; my sorrow is not kept secret from you.
My heart goes out in pain, my strength is wasting away; as for the light of my eyes, it is gone from me.
My lovers and my friends keep away from my disease; my relations keep far away.
Those who have a desire to take my life put nets for me; those who are designing my destruction say evil things against me, all the day their minds are full of deceit.
But I kept my ears shut like a man without hearing; like a man without a voice, never opening his mouth.
So I was like a man whose ears are shut, and in whose mouth there are no sharp words.
In you, O Lord, is my hope: you will give me an answer, O Lord, my God.
I said, Let them not be glad over me; when my foot is moved, let them not be lifted up with pride against me.
My feet are near to falling, and my sorrow is ever before me.
I will make clear my wrongdoing, with sorrow in my heart for my sin.
But they are strong who have hate for me without cause: those who are against me falsely are increased in numbers.
They give me back evil for good; they are my haters because I go after the thing which is right.
Do not give me up, O Lord; O my God, be near to me.
Come quickly to give me help, O Lord, my salvation.To the chief music-maker. Of Jeduthun. A Psalm. Of David.
I said, I will give attention to my ways, so that my tongue may do no wrong; I will keep my mouth under control, while the sinner is before me.
I made no sound, I said no word, even of good; and I was moved with sorrow.
My heart was burning in my breast; while I was deep in thought the fire was lighted; then I said with my tongue,
Lord, give me knowledge of my end, and of the measure of my days, so that I may see how feeble I am.
You have made my days no longer than a hand's measure; and my years are nothing in your eyes; truly, every man is but a breath. (Selah.)
Truly, every man goes on his way like an image; he is troubled for no purpose: he makes a great store of wealth, and has no knowledge of who will get it.
And now, Lord, what am I waiting for? my hope is in you.
Make me free from all my sins; do not let me be shamed by the man of evil behaviour.
I was quiet, and kept my mouth shut; because you had done it.
No longer let your hand be hard on me; I am wasted by the blows of your hand.
By the weight of your wrath against man's sin, the glory of his form is wasted away; truly every man is but a breath. (Selah.)
Let my prayer come to your ears, O Lord, and give attention to my cry, make an answer to my weeping: for my time here is short before you, and in a little time I will be gone, like all my fathers.
Let your wrath be turned away from me, so that I may be comforted, before I go away from here, and become nothing.To the chief music-maker. Of David. A Psalm.
When I was waiting quietly for the Lord, his heart was turned to me, and he gave ear to my cry.
He took me up out of a deep waste place, out of the soft and sticky earth; he put my feet on a rock, and made my steps certain.
And he put a new song in my mouth, even praise to our God; numbers have seen it with fear, and put their faith in the Lord.
Happy is the man who has faith in the Lord, and does not give honour to the men of pride or to those who are turned away to deceit.
O Lord my God, great are the wonders which you have done in your thought for us; it is not possible to put them out in order before you; when I would give an account of them, their number is greater than I may say.
You had no desire for offerings of beasts or fruits of the earth; ears you made for me: for burned offerings and sin offerings you made no request.
Then I said, See, I come; it is recorded of me in the roll of the book,
My delight is to do your pleasure, O my God; truly, your law is in my heart.
I have given news of righteousness in the great meeting; O Lord, you have knowledge that I have not kept back my words.
Your righteousness has not been folded away in my heart; I have made clear your true word and your salvation; I have not kept secret your mercy or your faith from the great meeting.
Take not away your gentle mercies from me, O Lord; let your mercy and your faith keep me safe for ever.
For unnumbered evils are round about me; my sins have overtaken me, so that I am bent down with their weight; they are more than the hairs of my head, my strength is gone because of them.
Be pleased, O Lord, to take me out of danger; O Lord, come quickly and give me help.
Let those who go after my soul for its destruction have shame and trouble together; let them be turned back and made foolish who take pleasure in my trouble.
Let those who say to me, Aha, aha! be surprised because of their shame.
Let all those who are looking for you be glad and have joy in you; let the lovers of your salvation ever say, May the Lord be great.
Though I am poor and in need, the Lord has me in mind; you are my help and my saviour; let there be no waiting, O my God.To the chief music-maker. A Psalm. Of David.
Happy is the man who gives thought to the poor; the Lord will be his saviour in the time of trouble.
The Lord will keep him safe, and give him life; the Lord will let him be a blessing on the earth, and will not give him into the hand of his haters.
The Lord will be his support on his bed of pain: by you will all his grief be turned to strength.
I said, Lord, have mercy on me; make my soul well, because my faith is in you.
My haters say evil against me, When will he be dead, and his name come to an end?
If one comes to see me, deceit is in his heart; he keeps a store of evil, which he makes public in every place.
All my haters are talking secretly together against me; they are designing my downfall.
They say, He has an evil disease, which will not let him go: and now that he is down he will not get up again.
Even my dearest friend, in whom I had faith, who took bread with me, is turned against me.
But you, O Lord, have mercy on me, lifting me up, so that I may give them their punishment.
By this I see that you have pleasure in me, because my hater does not overcome me.
And as for me, you are my support in my righteousness, giving me a place before your face for ever.
May the Lord God of Israel be praised, through eternal days and for ever. So be it. So be it.To the chief music-maker. Maschil. Of the sons of Korah.
Like the desire of the roe for the water-streams, so is my soul's desire for you, O God.
My soul is dry for need of God, the living God; when may I come and see the face of God?
My tears have been my food day and night, while they keep saying to me, Where is your God?
Let my soul be overflowing with grief when these things come back to my mind, how I went in company to the house of God, with the voice of joy and praise, with the song of those who were keeping the feast.
Why are you crushed down, O my soul? and why are you troubled in me? put your hope in God; for I will again give him praise who is my help and my God.
My soul is crushed down in me, so I will keep you in mind; from the land of Jordan and of the Hermons, from the hill Mizar.
Deepissoundingto deepatthenoiseofyourwaterfalls; allyourwaveshavegonerolling over me.
But the Lord will send his mercy in the daytime, and in the night his song will be with me, a prayer to the God of my life.
I will say to God my Rock, Why have you let me go from your memory? why do I go in sorrow because of the attacks of my haters?
The cruel words of my haters are like a crushing of my bones; when they say to me every day, Where is your God?
Why are you crushed down, O my soul? and why are you troubled in me? put your hope in God; for I will again give him praise who is my help and my God.Be my judge, O God, supporting my cause against a nation without religion; O keep me from the false and evil man.
You are the God of my strength; why have you put me from you? why do I go in sorrow because of the attacks of my haters?
O send out your light and your true word; let them be my guide: let them take me to your holy hill, and to your tents.
Then I will go up to the altar of God, to the God of my joy; I will be glad and give praise to you on an instrument of music, O God, my God.
Why are you crushed down, O my soul? and why are you troubled in me? put your hope in God, for I will again give him praise who is my help and my God.To the chief music-maker. Of the sons of Korah Maschil.
It has come to our ears, O God, our fathers have given us the story, of the works which you did in their days, in the old times,
Uprooting the nations with your hand, and planting our fathers in their place; cutting down the nations, but increasing the growth of your people.
For they did not make the land theirs by their swords, and it was not their arms which kept them safe; but your right hand, and your arm, and the light of your face, because you had pleasure in them.
You are my King and my God; ordering salvation for Jacob.
Through you will we overcome our haters; by your name will they be crushed under our feet who are violent against us.
I will not put faith in my bow, my sword will not be my salvation.
But it is you who have been our saviour from those who were against us, and have put to shame those who had hate for us.
Our pride is in God at all times, to his name we give praise for ever. (Selah.)
But now you have sent us away from you, and put us to shame; you do not go out with our armies.
Because of this we are turned back by the attacker: those who have hate for us take our goods for themselves.
You have made us like sheep which are taken for meat; we are put to flight among the nations.
You let your people go for nothing; your wealth is not increased by their price.
You have made us to be looked down on by our neighbours, we are laughed at and shamed by those who are round about us.
Our name is a word of shame among the nations, a sign for the shaking of heads among the peoples.
My downfall is ever before me, and I am covered with the shame of my face;
Because of the voice of him who says sharp and bitter words; because of the hater and him who is the instrument of punishment.
All this has come on us, but still we have kept you in our memory; and we have not been false to your word.
Our hearts have not gone back, and our steps have not been turned out of your way;
Though you have let us be crushed in the place of jackals, though we are covered with darkest shade.
If the name of our God has gone out of our minds, or if our hands have been stretched out to a strange god,
Will not God make search for it? for he sees the secrets of the heart.
Truly, because of you we are put to death every day; we are numbered like sheep for destruction.
Why are you sleeping, O Lord? awake! and come to our help, do not give us up for ever.
Why is your face covered, and why do you give no thought to our trouble and our cruel fate?
For our souls are crushed down to the dust: our bodies are stretched out on the earth.
Up! and come to our help, and give us salvation because of your mercy.To the chief music-maker; put to Shoshannim. Of the sons of Korah. Maschil. A Song of loves.
My heart is flowing over with good things; my words are of that which I have made for a king; my tongue is the pen of a ready writer.
You are fairer than the children of men; grace is flowing through your lips; for this cause the blessing of God is with you for ever.
Put on your sword, make it ready at your side, O strong chief, with your glory and power.
And go nobly on in your power, because you are good and true and without pride; and your right hand will be teaching you things of fear.
Your arrows are sharp in the heart of the king's haters; because of them the peoples are falling under you.
Your seat of power, O God, is for ever and ever; the rod of your kingdom is a rod of honour.
You have been a lover of righteousness and a hater of evil: and so God, your God, has put the oil of joy on your head, lifting you high over all other kings.
Your robes are full of the smell of all sorts of perfumes and spices; music from the king's ivory houses has made you glad.
Kings' daughters are among your noble women: on your right is the queen in gold of Ophir.
O daughter, give thought and attention, and let your ear be open; no longer keep in mind your people, and your father's house;
So will the king have a great desire for you, seeing how beautiful you are; because he is your lord, give him honour.
And the daughtersof Tyre will be there with an offering; those who have wealth among the people will be looking for your approval.
In the great house the king's daughter is all shining: her clothing is worked with gold.
She will come before the king in robes of needlework; the virgins in her train will come before you.
With joy and rapture will they come; they will go into the king's house.
Your children will take the place of your fathers; so that you may make them rulers over all the earth.
I will keep the memory of your name living through all generations; and because of this the people will give you praise for ever.To the chief music-maker. Of the sons of Korah; put to Alamoth. A Song.
God is our harbour and our strength, a very present help in trouble.
For this cause we will have no fear, even though the earth is changed, and though the mountains are moved in the heart of the sea;
Though its waters are sounding and troubled, and though the mountains are shaking with their violent motion. (Selah.)
There is a river whose streams make glad the resting-place of God, the holy place of the tents of the Most High.
God has taken his place in her; she will not be moved: he will come to her help at the dawn of morning.
The nations were angry, the kingdoms were moved; at the sound of his voice the earth became like wax.
The Lord of armies is with us; the God of Jacob is our high tower. (Selah.)
Come, see the works of the Lord, the destruction which he has made in the earth.
He puts an end to wars over all the earth; by him the bow is broken, and the spear cut in two, and the carriage burned in the fire.
Be at peace in the knowledge that I am God: I will be lifted up among the nations, I will be honoured through all the earth.
The Lord of armies is with us; the God of Jacob is our high tower. (Selah.)To the chief music-maker. A Psalm. Of the sons of Korah.
O make a glad noise with your hands, all you peoples; letting your voices go up to God with joy.
For the Lord Most High is to be feared; he is a great King over all the earth.
He will put down the peoples under us, and the nations under our feet.
He will give us our heritage, the glory of Jacob who is dear to him. (Selah.)
God has gone up with a glad cry, the Lord with the sound of the horn.
Give praises to God, make songs of praise; give praises to our King, make songs of praise.
For God is the King of all the earth; make songs of praise with knowledge.
God is the ruler over the nations; God is on the high seat of his holy rule.
The rulers of the peoples have come together, with the people of the God of Abraham; because the powers of the earth are God's: he is lifted up on high.A Song. A Psalm. Of the sons of Korah.
Great is the Lord and greatly to be praised, in the town of our God, in his holy mountain.
Beautiful in its high position, the joy of all the earth, is the mountain of Zion, the mountain of God, the town of the great King.
In its buildings God is seen to be a high tower.
For see! the kings came together by agreement, they were joined together.
They saw it, and so were full of wonder; they were troubled, and went quickly away in fear.
Shaking came on them and pain, as on a woman in childbirth.
By you the ships of Tarshish are broken as by an east wind.
As it came to our ears so have we seen it, in the town of the Lord of armies, in the town of our God; God will keep it fixed for ever. (Selah.)
Our thoughts were of your mercy, O God, while we were in your Temple.
As your name is, O God, so is your praise to the ends of the earth; your right hand is full of righteousness.
Let there be joy in the mountain of Zion, and let the daughters of Judah be glad, because of your wise decisions.
Make your way about Zion, and go round it, numbering its towers.
Take note of its strong walls, looking well at its fair buildings; so that you may give word of it to the generation which comes after.
Because this God is our God for ever and ever: he will be our guide.Alamoth. To the chief music-maker. Of the sons of Korah. A Psalm.
Give attention to this, all you peoples; let your ears be open, all you who are living in the world.
High and low together, the poor, and those who have wealth.
From my mouth will come words of wisdom; and in the thoughts of my heart will be knowledge.
I will put my teaching into a story; I will make my dark sayings clear with music.
What cause have I for fear in the days of evil, when the evil-doing of those who are working for my downfall is round about me?
Even of those whose faith is in their wealth, and whose hearts are lifted up because of their stores.
Truly, no man may get back his soul for a price, or give to God the payment for himself;
(Because it takes a great price to keep his soul from death, and man is not able to give it.)
So that he might have eternal life, and never see the underworld.
For he sees that wise men come to their end, and foolish persons of low behaviour come to destruction together, letting their wealth go to others.
The place of the dead is their house for ever, and their resting-place through all generations; those who come after them give their names to their lands.
But man, like the animals, does not go on for ever; he comes to an end like the beasts.
This is the way of the foolish; their silver is for those who come after them, and their children get the pleasure of their gold. (Selah.)
Death will give them their food like sheep; the underworld is their fate and they will go down into it; their flesh is food for worms; their form is wasted away; the underworld is their resting-place for ever.
But God will get back my soul; for he will take me from the power of death. (Selah.)
Have no fear when wealth comes to a man, and the glory of his house is increased;
For at his death, he will take nothing away; his glory will not go down after him.
Though he might have pride in his soul in his life-time, and men will give you praise if you do well for yourself,
He will go to the generation of his fathers; he will not see the light again.
Man, like the animals, does not go on for ever; he comes to an end like the beasts.A Psalm. Of Asaph.
The God of gods, even the Lord, has sent out his voice, and the earth is full of fear; from the coming up of the sun to its going down.
From Zion, most beautiful of places, God has sent out his light.
Our God will come, and will not keep quiet; with fire burning before him, and storm- winds round him.
His voice will go out to the heavens and to the earth, for the judging of his people:
Let my saints come together to me; those who have made an agreement with me by offerings.
And let the heavens make clear his righteousness; for God himself is the judge. (Selah.)
Give ear, O my people, to my words; O Israel, I will be a witness against you; I am God, even your God.
I will not take up a cause against you because of your offerings, or because of your burned offerings, which are ever before me.
I will take no ox out of your house, or he-goats from your flocks;
For every beast of the woodland is mine, and the cattle on a thousand hills.
I see all the birds of the mountains, and the beasts of the field are mine.
If I had need of food, I would not give you word of it; for the earth is mine and all its wealth.
Am I to take the flesh of the ox for my food, or the blood of goats for my drink?
Make an offering of praise to God; keep the agreements which you have made with the Most High;
Let your voice come up to me in the day of trouble; I will be your saviour, so that you may give glory to me.
But to the sinner, God says, What are you doing, talking of my laws, or taking the words of my agreement in your mouth?
Seeing that you have no desire for my teaching, turning your back on my words.
When you saw a thief, you were in agreement with him, and you were joined with those who took other men's wives.
You have given your mouth to evil, your tongue to words of deceit.
You say evil of your brother; you make false statements against your mother's son.
These things have you done, and I said nothing; it seemed to you that I was such a one as yourself; but I will make a protest against you, and put them in order before your eyes.
Now keep this in mind, you who have no memory of God, for fear that you may be crushed under my hand, with no one to give you help:
Whoever makes an offering of praise gives glory to me; and to him who is upright in his ways I will make clear the salvation of God.To the chief music-maker. A Psalm. Of David. When Nathan the prophet came to him, after he had gone in to Bath-sheba.
Have pity on me, O God, in your mercy; out of a full heart, take away my sin.
Let all my wrongdoing be washed away, and make me clean from evil.
For I am conscious of my error; my sin is ever before me.
Against you, you only, have I done wrong, working that which is evil in your eyes; so that your words may be seen to be right, and you may be clear when you are judging.
Truly, I was formed in evil, and in sin did my mother give me birth.
Your desire is for what is true in the inner parts: in the secrets of my soul you will give me knowledge of wisdom.
Make me free from sin with hyssop: let me be washed whiter than snow.
Make me full of joy and rapture; so that the bones which have been broken may be glad.
Let your face be turned from my wrongdoing, and take away all my sins.
Make a clean heart in me, O God; give me a right spirit again.
Do not put me away from before you, or take your holy spirit from me.
Give me back the joy of your salvation; let a free spirit be my support.
Then will I make your ways clear to wrongdoers; and sinners will be turned to you.
Be my saviour from violent death, O God, the God of my salvation; and my tongue will give praise to your righteousness.
O Lord, let my lips be open, so that my mouth may make clear your praise.
You have no desire for an offering or I would give it; you have no delight in burned offerings.
The offerings of God are a broken spirit; a broken and sorrowing heart, O God, you will not put from you.
Do good to Zion in your good pleasure, building up the walls of Jerusalem.
Then you will have delight in the offerings of righteousness, in burned offerings and offerings of beasts; then they will make offerings of oxen on your altar.To the chief music-maker. Maschil. Of David. When Doeg the Edomite came to Saul saying, David has come to the house of Ahimelech.
Why do you take pride in wrongdoing, lifting yourself up against the upright man all the day?
Purposing destruction, using deceit; your tongue is like a sharp blade.
You have more love for evil than for good, for deceit than for works of righteousness. (Selah.)
Destruction is in all your words, O false tongue.
But God will put an end to you for ever; driving you out from your tent, uprooting you from the land of the living. (Selah.)
The upright will see it with fear, and will say, laughing at you:
See, this is the man who did not make God his strength, but had faith in his goods and his property, and made himself strong in his wealth.
But I am like a branching olive-tree in the house of God; I have put my faith in his mercy for ever and ever.
I will give you praise without end for what you have done; I will give honour to your name before your saints, for it is good.To the chief music-maker; put to Mahalath. Maschil. Of David.
The foolish man has said in his heart, God will not do anything. They are unclean, they have done evil works; there is not one who does good.
God was looking down from heaven on the children of men, to see if there were any who had wisdom, searching after God.
Every one of them has gone back; they are unclean: there is not one who does good, no, not one.
Have the workers of evil no knowledge? they take my people for food, as they would take bread; they make no prayer to God.
They were in great fear, where there was no cause for fear: for the bones of those who make war on you have been broken by God; you have put them to shame, because God has no desire for them.
May the salvation of Israel come out of Zion! When the fate of his people is changed by God, Jacob will have joy, and Israel will be glad.To the chief music-maker; on Neginoth. Maschil. Of David. When the Ziphites came and said to Saul, Is not David keeping himself secret among us?
Let your name be my salvation, O God; let my cause be judged by your strength.
Let my prayer come before you, O God; give ear to the words of my mouth.
For men who are going after me have come out against me, violent men are purposing to take my soul; they have not put God before their eyes. (Selah.)
See, God is my helper: the Lord is the great supporter of my soul.
Let the evil works of my haters come back on them again; let them be cut off by your good faith.
Freely will I make my offerings to you; I will give praise to your name, O Lord, for it is good.
Because it has been my saviour from all my trouble; and my eyes have seen the punishment of my haters.To the chief music-maker, on Neginoth. Maschil. Of David.
Give hearing to my prayer, O God; and let not your ear be shut against my request.
Give thought to me, and let my prayer be answered: I have been made low in sorrow;
I am troubled because of the voice of the cruel ones, because of the loud cry of the evil-doers; for they put a weight of evil on me, and they are cruel in their hate for me.
My heart is deeply wounded, and the fear of death has come on me.
Fear and shaking have come over me, with deep fear I am covered.
And I said, If only I had wings like a dove! for then I would go in flight from here and be at rest.
I would go wandering far away, living in the waste land. (Selah.)
I would quickly take cover from the driving storm and from the violent wind.
Send destruction on them, O Lord, make a division of tongues among them: for I have seen fighting and violent acts in the town.
By day and night they go round the town, on the walls; trouble and sorrow are in the heart of it.
Evil is there; cruel rule and deceit are ever in the streets.
For it was not my hater who said evil of me; that would have been no grief to me; it was not one outside the number of my friends who made himself strong against me, or I would have kept myself from him in a secret place;
But it was you, my equal, my guide, my well-loved friend.
We had loving talk together, and went to the house of God in company.
Let the hand of death come on them suddenly, and let them go down living into the underworld; because evil is in their houses and in their hearts.
As for me, I will make my prayer to God, and he will be my saviour.
In the evening and in the morning and in the middle of the day I will make my prayer with sounds of grief; and my voice will come to his ears.
He has taken my soul away from the attack which was made against me, and given it peace; for great numbers were against me.
God will give thought to me; he who from early times is strong will send pain and trouble on them. (Selah.) Because they are unchanged, they have no fear of God.
He has put out his hand against those who were at peace with him; he has not kept his agreement.
The words of his mouth were smoother than butter, but war was in his heart; his words were softer than oil, but they were sharp swords.
Put your cares on the Lord, and he will be your support; he will not let the upright man be moved.
But you, O God, will send them down into the underworld; the cruel and the false will be cut off before half their days are ended; but I will have faith in you.To the chief music-maker; put to Jonath elem rehokim. Of David. Michtam. When the Philistines took him in Gath.
Have mercy on me, O God, for man is attempting my destruction; every day he makes cruel attacks against me.
My haters are ever ready to put an end to me; great numbers are lifting themselves up against me.
In the time of my fear, I will have faith in you.
In God will I give praise to his word; in God have I put my hope; I will have no fear of what flesh may do to me.
Every day they make wrong use of my words; all their thoughts are against me for evil.
They come together, they are waiting in secret places, they take note of my steps, they are waiting for my soul.
By evil-doing they will not get free from punishment. In wrath, O God, let the peoples be made low.
You have seen my wanderings; put the drops from my eyes into your bottle; are they not in your record?
When I send up my cry to you, my haters will be turned back; I am certain of this, for God is with me.
In God will I give praise to his word; in the Lord will I give praise to his word.
In God have I put my hope, I will have no fear of what man may do to me.
I keep the memory of my debt to you, O God; I will give you the offerings of praise.
Becauseyouhavetakenmysoulfromthepowerofdeath; andkeptmyfeetfromfalling, so that I may be walking before God in the light of life.To the chief music-maker; put to Al-tashheth. Michtam. Of David. When he went in flight from Saul, in the hole of the rock.
Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me; for the hope of my soul is in you: I will keep myself safely under the shade of your wings, till these troubles are past.
I will send up my cry to the Most High God; to God who does all things for me.
He will send from heaven, and take me from the power of him whose desire is for my destruction. God will send out his mercy and his good faith.
My soul is among lions; I am stretched out among those who are on fire, even the sons of men, whose teeth are spears and arrows, and whose tongue is a sharp sword.
O God, be lifted up higher than the heavens; let your glory be over all the earth.
They have made ready a net for my steps; my soul is bent down; they have made a great hole before me, and have gone down into it themselves. (Selah.)
My heart is fixed, O God, my heart is fixed; I will make songs, and give praise.
You are my glory; let the instruments of music be awake; I myself will be awake with the dawn.
I will give you praise, O Lord, among the peoples; I will make songs to you among the nations.
For your mercy is great, stretching up to the heavens, and your righteousness goes up to the clouds.
Be lifted up, O God, higher than the heavens, let your glory be over all the earth.To the chief music-maker; put to Al-tashheth. Michtam. Of David.
Is there righteousness in your mouths, O you gods? are you upright judges, O you sons of men?
The purposes of your hearts are evil; your hands are full of cruel doings on the earth.
The evil-doers are strange from the first; from the hour of their birth they go out of the true way, saying false words.
Their poison is like the poison of a snake; they are like the adder, whose ears are shut;
Who will not be moved by the voice of the wonder-worker, however great are his powers.
O God, let their teeth be broken in their mouths; let the great teeth of the young lions be pulled out, O Lord.
Let them be turned to liquid like the ever-flowing waters; let them be cut off like the grass by the way.
Let them be like an after-birth which is turned to water and comes to an end; like the fruit of a woman who gives birth before her time, let them not see the sun.
Before they are conscious of it, let them be cut down like thorns; let a strong wind take them away like waste growth.
The upright man will be glad when he sees their punishment; his feet will be washed in the blood of the evil-doer.
So that men will say, Truly there is a reward for righteousness; truly there is a God who is judge on the earth.To the chief music-maker; put to At-tashheth. Michtam. Of David. When Saul sent, and they were watching the house, to put him to death.
Take me out of the hands of the cruel ones, O my God; keep me safe from those who come up against me.
Take me out of the power of the workers of evil, and keep me safe from the men of blood.
For see, they are watching in secret for my soul; the strong have come together against me? but not because of my sin, or my evil-doing, O Lord.
For no sin of mine they go quickly and get themselves ready; be awake and come to my help, and see.
You, O Lord God of armies, are the God of Israel; come now and give punishment to the nations; have no mercy on any workers of deceit. (Selah.)
They come back in the evening; they make a noise like a dog, and go round the town.
See, hate is dropping from their lips; curses are on their tongues: they say, Who gives attention to it?
But you are laughing at them, O Lord; you will make sport of all the nations.
O my strength, I will put my hope in you; because God is my strong tower.
The God of my mercy will go before me: God will let me see my desire effected on my haters.
Put them not to death, for so my people will keep the memory of them: let them be sent in all directions by your power; make them low, O Lord our saviour.
Because of the sin of their mouths and the word of their lips, let them even be taken in their pride; and for their curses and their deceit,
Put an end to them in your wrath, put an end to them, so that they may not be seen again; let them see that God is ruling in Jacob and to the ends of the earth. (Selah.)
And in the evening let them come back, and make a noise like a dog, and go round the town.
Let them go wandering up and down in search of food, and be there all night if they have not enough.
But I will make songs of your power; yes, I will give cries of joy for your mercy in the morning; because you have been my strength and my high tower in the day of my trouble.
To you, O my strength, will I make my song: because God is my high tower, even the God of my mercy.To the chief music-maker; put to Shushan-eduth. Michtam. Of David. For teaching. When he was fighting against Aram-naharaim and Aramzobah, when Joab came back, and put twelve thousand of the Edomites to death, in the Valley of Salt.
God, you have put us away from you, you have sent us in all directions, you have been angry; O be turned to us again.
By the power of your hand the earth is shaking and broken; make it strong again, for it is moved.
You have made the people see hard times; you have given us the wine of shaking for our drink.
Give a safe place to those who have fear of you, where they may go in flight from before the bow. (Selah.)
So that your loved ones may be made safe, let your right hand be my salvation, and give me an answer.
God has said in his holy place, I will be glad: I will make a division of Shechem, and the valley of Succoth will be measured out.
Gilead is mine, and Manasseh is mine; and Ephraim is the strength of my head; Judah is my law-giver;
Moab is my washpot; over Edom will I put out my shoe; over Philistia will a glad cry be sounded.
Who will take me into the strong town? who will be my guide into Edom?
Have not you put us away, O God? and you have not gone out with our armies.
Give us help in our trouble; for there is no help in man.
Through God we will do great things, for through him our haters will be crushed under our feet.To the chief music-maker. On a corded instrument. Of David.
Let my cry come to you, O God; let your ears be open to my prayer.
From the end of the earth will I send up my cry to you, when my heart is overcome: take me to the rock which is over-high for me.
For you have been my secret place, and my high tower from those who made war on me.
I will make your tent my resting-place for ever: I will keep myself under the cover of your wings. (Selah.)
For you, O God, have made answer to my prayers; you have given me the heritage of those who give honour to your name.
You will give the king long life; and make his years go on through the generations.
May the seat of his authority be before God for ever; may mercy and righteousness keep him safe.
So will I make songs in praise of your name for ever, giving to God that which is right day by day.To the chief music-maker. After Jeduthun. A Psalm. Of David.
My soul, put all your faith in God; for from him comes my salvation.
He only is my Rock and my salvation; he is my high tower; I will not be greatly moved.
How long will you go on designing evil against a man? running against him as against a broken wall, which is on the point of falling?
Their only thought is to put him down from his place of honour; their delight is in deceit: blessing is in their mouths but cursing in their hearts. (Selah.)
My soul, put all your faith in God; for from him comes my hope.
He only is my Rock and my salvation; he is my high tower; I will not be greatly moved.
In God is my salvation, and my glory; the Rock of my strength, and my safe place.
Have faith in him at all times, you people; let your hearts go flowing out before him: God is our safe place. (Selah.)
Truly men of low birth are nothing, and men of high position are not what they seem; if they are put in the scales together they are less than a breath.
Have no faith in the rewards of evil-doing, or in profits wrongly made: if your wealth is increased, do not put your hopes on it.
Once has God said, twice has it come to my ears, that power is God's:
And mercy, O Lord, is yours, for you give to every man the reward of his work.A Psalm. Of David. When he was in the waste land of Judah.
O God, you are my God; early will I make my search for you: my soul is dry for need of you, my flesh is wasted with desire for you, as a dry and burning land where no water is;
To see your power and your glory, as I have seen you in the holy place.
Because your mercy is better than life, my lips will give you praise.
So will I go on blessing you all my life, lifting up my hands in your name.
My soul will be comforted, as with good food; and my mouth will give you praise with songs of joy;
When the memory of you comes to me on my bed, and when I give thought to you in the night-time.
Because you have been my help, I will have joy in the shade of your wings.
My soul keeps ever near you: your right hand is my support.
But those whose desire is my soul's destruction will go down to the lower parts of the earth.
They will be cut off by the sword; they will be food for foxes.
But the king will have joy in God; everyone who takes an oath by him will have cause for pride; but the false mouth will be stopped.To the chief music-maker. A Psalm. Of David.
O God, let the voice of my grief come to your ear: keep my life from the fear of those who are against me.
Keep me safe from the secret purpose of wrongdoers; from the band of the workers of evil;
Who make their tongues sharp like a sword, and whose arrows are pointed, even bitter words;
So that in secret they may let loose their arrows at the upright, suddenly and unseen.
They make themselves strong in an evil purpose; they make holes for secret nets; they say, Who will see it,
Or make discovery of our secret purpose? The design is framed with care; and the inner thought of a man, and his heart, is deep.
But God sends out an arrow against them; suddenly they are wounded.
The evil of their tongues is the cause of their fall; all those who see them are shaking their heads at them.
And in fear men make public the works of God; and giving thought to his acts they get wisdom.
The upright will be glad in the Lord and have hope in him; and all the lovers of righteousness will give him glory.To the chief music-maker. A Psalm. Of David. A Song.
It is right for you, O God, to have praise in Zion: to you let the offering be made.
To you, O hearer of prayer, let the words of all flesh come.
Evils have overcome us: but as for our sins, you will take them away.
Happy is the man of your selection, to whom you give a resting-place in your house; we will be full of the good things out of your holy place.
You will give us an answer in righteousness by great acts of power, O God of our salvation; you who are the hope of all the ends of the earth, and of the far-off lands of the sea;
The God by whose strength the mountains are fixed; who is robed with power:
Who makes the loud voice of the sea quiet, and puts an end to the sound of its waves.
Those in the farthest parts of the earth have fear when they see your signs: the outgoings of the morning and evening are glad because of you.
You have given your blessing to the earth, watering it and making it fertile; the river of God is full of water: and having made it ready, you give men grain.
You make the ploughed lands full of water; you make smooth the slopes: you make the earth soft with showers, sending your blessing on its growth.
The year is crowned with the good you give; life-giving rain is dropping from your footsteps,
Falling on the grass of the waste land: and the little hills are glad on every side.
The grass-land is thick with flocks; the valleys are full of grain; they give glad cries and songs of joy.To the chief music-maker. A Song. A Psalm.
Send up a glad cry to God, all the earth:
Make a song in honour of his name: give praise and glory to him.
Say to God, How greatly to be feared are your works! because of your great power your haters are forced to put themselves under your feet.
Let all the earth give you worship, and make songs to you; let them make songs to your name. (Selah.)
Come and see the works of God: he is to be feared in all he does to the children of men.
The sea was turned into dry land: they went through the river on foot: there did we have joy in him.
He is ruling in power for ever; his eyes are watching the nations: may his haters have no strength against him. (Selah.)
Give blessings to our God, O you peoples, let the voice of his praise be loud;
Because he gives us life, and has not let our feet be moved.
For you, O God, have put us to the test: testing us by fire like silver.
You let us be put in prison; chains were put on our legs.
You let men go driving over our heads; we went through fire and through water; but you took us out into a wide place.
I will come into your house with burned offerings, I will make payment of my debt to you,
Keeping the word which came from my lips, and which my mouth said, when I was in trouble.
I will give you burned offerings of fat beasts, and the smoke of sheep; I will make offerings of oxen and goats. (Selah.)
Come, give ear to me, all you God-fearing men, so that I may make clear to you what he has done for my soul.
My voice went up to him, and I was lifted up from the underworld.
I said in my heart, The Lord will not give ear to me:
But truly God's ear has been open; he has give attention to the voice of my prayer.
Praise be to God who has not taken away his good faith and his mercy from me.To the chief music-maker. With corded instruments. A Psalm. A Song.
May God give us mercy and blessing, and let the light of his face be shining on us; (Selah.)
So that men may see your way on the earth, and your salvation among all nations.
Let the peoples give you praise, O God; let all the peoples give you praise.
O let the nations be glad, and make song of joy; for you will be the judge of the peoples in righteousness, guiding the nations of the earth. (Selah.)
Let the peoples give you praise, O God; let all the peoples give you praise.
The earth has given her increase; and God, even our God, will give us his blessing.
God will give us his blessing; so let all the ends of the earth be in fear of him.To the chief music-maker. Of David. A Psalm. A Song.
Let God be seen, and let his haters be put to flight; let those who are against him be turned back before him.
Let them be like smoke before the driving wind; as wax turning soft before the fire, so let them come to an end before the power of God.
But let the upright be glad; let them have delight before God; let them be full of joy.
Make songs to God, make songs of praise to his name; make a way for him who comes through the waste lands; his name is Jah; be glad before him.
A father to those who have no father, a judge of the widows, is God in his holy place.
Those who are without friends, God puts in families; he makes free those who are in chains; but those who are turned away from him are given a dry land.
O God, when you went out before your people, wandering through the waste land; (Selah.)
The earth was shaking and the heavens were streaming, because God was present; even Sinai itself was moved before God, the God of Israel.
You, O God, did freely send the rain, giving strength to the weariness of your heritage.
Those whose resting-place was there, even the poor, were comforted by your good things, O God.
The Lord gives the word; great is the number of the women who make it public.
Kings of armies quickly go in flight: and the women in the houses make a division of their goods.
Will you take your rest among the flocks? like the wings of a dove covered with silver, and its feathers with yellow gold.
When the Most High put the kings to flight, it was as white as snow in Salmon.
A hill of God is the hill of Bashan; a hill with high tops is the hill of Bashan.
Why are you looking with envy, you high hills, on the hill desired by God as his resting- place? truly, God will make it his house for ever.
The war-carriage of God is among Israel's thousands; the Lord has come from Sinai to the holy place.
You have gone up on high, taking your prisoners with you; you have taken offerings from men; the Lord God has taken his place on the seat of his power.
Praise be to the Lord, who is our support day by day, even the God of our salvation. (Selah.)
Our God is for us a God of salvation; his are the ways out of death.
The heads of the haters of God will be crushed; even the head of him who still goes on in his evil ways.
The Lord said, I will make them come back from Bashan, and from the deep parts of the sea;
So that your foot may be red with blood, and the tongues of your dogs with the same.
We see your going, O God: even the going of my God, my King, into the holy place.
The makers of songs go before, the players of music come after, among the young girls playing on brass instruments.
Give praise to God in the great meeting; even the Lord, you who come from the fountain of Israel.
There is little Benjamin ruling them, the chiefs of Judah and their army, the rulers of Zebulun and the rulers of Naphtali.
O God, send out your strength; the strength, O God, with which you have done great things for us,
Out of your Temple in Jerusalem.
Say sharp words to the beast among the water-plants, the band of strong ones, with the lords of the peoples, put an end to the people whose delight is in war.
Kings will give you offerings, they will come out of Egypt; from Pathros will come offerings of silver; Ethiopia will be stretching out her hands to God.
Make songs to God, you kingdoms of the earth; O make songs of praise to the Lord; (Selah.)
To him who goes or the clouds of heaven, the heaven which was from earliest times; he sends out his voice of power.
Make clear that strength is God's: he is lifted up over Israel, and his power is in the clouds.
O God, you are to be feared in your holy place: the God of Israel gives strength and power to his people. Praise be to God.To the chief music-maker; put to Shoshannim. Of David.
Be my saviour, O God; because the waters have come in, even to my neck.
My feet are deep in the soft earth, where there is no support; I have come into deep waters, the waves are flowing over me.
I am tired with my crying; my throat is burning: my eyes are wasted with waiting for my God.
Those who have hate for me without cause are greater in number than the hairs of my head; those who are against me, falsely desiring my destruction, are very strong; I gave back what I had not taken away.
O God, you see how foolish I am; and my wrongdoing is clear to you.
Let not those who have hope in you be put to shame because of me, O Lord God of armies: let not those who are waiting for you be made low because of me, O God of Israel.
I have been wounded with sharp words because of you; my face has been covered with shame.
I have become strange to my brothers, and like a man from a far country to my mother's children.
I am on fire with passion for your house; and the hard things which are said about you have come on me.
My bitter weeping, and my going without food, were turned to my shame.
When I put on the clothing of grief, they said evil of me.
I am a cause of wonder to those in authority; a song to those who are given to strong drink.
But as for me, let my prayer be made to you, O Lord, at a time when you are pleased; O God, give me an answer in your great mercy, for your salvation is certain.
Take me from the grip of the sticky earth, so that I may not go down into it; let me be lifted up from the deep waters.
Let me not be covered by the flowing waters; let not the deep waters go over my head, and let me not be shut up in the underworld.
Give an answer to my words, O Lord; for your mercy is good: be turned to me, because of your great pity.
Let not your face be covered from your servant, for I am in trouble; quickly give me an answer.
Come near to my soul, for its salvation: be my saviour, because of those who are against me.
You have seen my shame, how I was laughed at and made low; my haters are all before you.
My heart is broken by bitter words, I am full of grief; I made a search for some to have pity on me, but there was no one; I had no comforter.
They gave me poison for my food; and bitter wine for my drink.
Let their table before them be for their destruction; let their feasts become a net to take them.
Let their eyes be blind so that they may not see; let their bodies for ever be shaking.
Let your curse come on them; let the heat of your wrath overtake them.
Give their houses to destruction, and let there be no one in their tents.
Because they are cruel to him against whom your hand is turned; they make bitter the grief of him who is wounded by you.
Let their punishment be increased; let them not come into your righteousness.
Let their names be taken from the book of the living, let them not be numbered with the upright.
But I am poor and full of sorrow; let me be lifted up by your salvation, O Lord.
I will give praise to the name of God with a song; I will give glory to him for what he has done.
This will be more pleasing to the Lord than an ox, or a young ox of full growth.
The poor will see it and be glad: you who are lovers of God, let your hearts have life.
For the ears of the Lord are open to the poor, and he takes thought for his prisoners.
Let the heavens and the earth give praise to him, the seas, and everything moving in them.
For God will be the saviour of Zion, and the builder of the towns of Judah; so that it may be their resting-place and heritage.
The seed of his servants will have their part in it, and there the lovers of his name will have rest.To the chief music-maker. Of David. To keep in memory.
Let your salvation come quickly, O God; come quickly to my help, O Lord.
Let those who go after my soul have shame and trouble; let those who have evil designs against me be turned back and made foolish.
Let those who say Aha, aha! be turned back as a reward of their shame.
Let all those who are looking for you be glad and have joy in you; let the lovers of your salvation ever say, May God be great.
But I am poor and in need; come to me quickly, O God; you are my help and my saviour; let there be no waiting, O Lord.In you, O Lord, have I put my hope; let me never be shamed.
Keep me safe in your righteousness, and come to my help; give ear to my voice, and be my saviour.
Be my strong Rock, the strong place of my salvation; for you are my Rock, and my safe place.
O my God, take me out of the hand of the sinner, out of the hand of the evil and cruel man.
For you are my hope, O Lord God; I have had faith in you from the time when I was young.
You have been my support from the day of my birth; you took me out of my mother's body; my praise will be ever of you.
I am a wonder to all; but you are my strong tower.
My mouth will be full of your praise and glory all the day.
Do not give me up when I am old; be my help even when my strength is gone.
For my haters are waiting secretly for me; and those who are watching for my soul are banded together in their evil designs,
Saying, God has given him up; go after him and take him, for he has no helper.
O God, be not far from me; O my God, come quickly to my help.
Let those who say evil against my soul be overcome and put to shame; let my haters be made low and have no honour.
But I will go on ever hoping, and increasing in all your praise.
My mouth will make clear your righteousness and your salvation all the day; for they are more than may be measured.
I will give news of the great acts of the Lord God; my words will be of your righteousness, and of yours only.
O God, you have been my teacher from the time when I was young; and I have been talking of your works of wonder even till now.
Now when I am old and grey-headed, O God, give me not up; till I have made clear your strength to this generation, and your power to all those to come.
Your righteousness, O God, is very high; you have done great things; O God, who is like you?
You, who have sent great and bitter troubles on me, will give me life again, lifting me up from the deep waters of the underworld.
You will make me greater than before, and give me comfort on every side.
I will give praise to you with instruments of music, O my God, for you are true; I will make songs to you with music, O Holy One of Israel.
Joy will be on my lips when I make melody to you; and in my soul, to which you have given salvation.
My tongue will be talking of your righteousness all the day; for those whose purpose is to do me evil have been crushed and put to shame.Of Solomon.
Give the king your authority, O God, and your righteousness to the king's son.
May he be a judge of your people in righteousness, and make true decisions for the poor.
May the mountains give peace to the people, and the hills righteousness.
May he be a judge of the poor among the people, may he give salvation to the children of those who are in need; by him let the violent be crushed.
May his life go on as long as the sun and moon, through all generations.
May he come down like rain on the cut grass; like showers watering the earth.
In his days may the upright do well, living in peace as long as there is a moon in heaven.
Let his kingdom be from sea to sea, from the River to the ends of the earth.
Let those who are against him go down before him; and let his haters be low in the dust.
Let the kings of Tarshish and of the islands come back with offerings; let the kings of Sheba and Seba give of their stores.
Yes, let all kings go down before him; let all nations be his servants.
For he will be a saviour to the poor in answer to his cry; and to him who is in need, without a helper.
He will have pity on the poor, and be the saviour of those who are in need.
He will keep their souls free from evil designs and violent attacks; and their blood will be of value in his eyes.
May he have long life, and may gold from Sheba be given to him: may prayers be made for him at all times; may blessings be on him every day.
May there be wide-stretching fields of grain in the land, shaking on the top of the mountains, full of fruit like Lebanon: may its stems be unnumbered like the grass of the earth.
May his name go on for ever, as long as the sun: may men be blessing themselves by him; may all nations be blessing his name.
Praise be to the Lord God, the God of Israel, the only doer of wonders.
Praise to the glory of his noble name for ever; let all the earth be full of his glory. So be it, So be it.
The prayers of David, the son of Jesse, are ended.A Psalm. Of Asaph.
Truly, God is good to Israel, even to such as are clean in heart.
But as for me, my feet had almost gone from under me; I was near to slipping;
Because of my envy of the men of pride, when I saw the well-being of the wrongdoers.
For they have no pain; their bodies are fat and strong.
They are not in trouble as others are; they have no part in the unhappy fate of men.
For this reason pride is round them like a chain; they are clothed with violent behaviour as with a robe.
Their eyes are bursting with fat; they have more than their heart's desire.
Their thoughts are deep with evil designs; their talk from their seats of power is of cruel acts.
Their mouth goes up to heaven; their tongues go walking through the earth.
For this reason they are full of bread; and water is ever flowing for them.
And they say, How will the Lord see this? is there knowledge in the Most High?
Truly, such are the sinners; they do well at all times, and their wealth is increased.
As for me, I have made my heart clean to no purpose, washing my hands in righteousness;
For I have been troubled all the day; every morning have I undergone punishment.
If I would make clear what it is like, I would say, You are false to the generation of your children.
When my thoughts were turned to see the reason of this, it was a weariness in my eyes;
Till I went into God's holy place, and saw the end of the evil-doers.
You put their feet where there was danger of slipping, so that they go down into destruction.
How suddenly are they wasted! fears are the cause of their destruction.
As a dream when one is awake, they are ended; they are like an image gone out of mind when sleep is over.
My heart was made bitter, and I was pained by the bite of grief:
As for me, I was foolish, and without knowledge; I was like a beast before you.
But still I am ever with you; you have taken me by my right hand.
Your wisdom will be my guide, and later you will put me in a place of honour.
Whom have I in heaven but you? and having you I have no desire for anything on earth.
My flesh and my heart are wasting away: but God is the Rock of my heart and my eternal heritage.
For those who are far away from you will come to destruction: you will put an end to all those who have not kept faith with you.
But it is good for me to come near to God: I have put my faith in the Lord God, so that I may make clear all his works.Maschil. Of Asaph.
Of God, why have you put us away from you for ever? why is the fire of your wrath smoking against the sheep who are your care?
Keep in mind your band of worshippers, for whom you gave payment in the days which are past, whom you took for yourself as the people of your heritage; even this mountain of Zion, which has been your resting-place.
Go up and see the unending destruction; all the evil which your haters have done in the holy place;
Sending out their voices like lions among your worshippers; they have put up their signs to be seen.
They are cutting down, like a man whose blade is lifted up against the thick trees.
Your doors are broken down with hammers and iron blades.
They have put on fire your holy place; they have made the place of your name unclean, pulling it down to the earth.
They have said in their hearts, Let us put an end to them all together; they have given over to the fire all God's places of worship in the land.
We do not see our signs: there is no longer any prophet, or anyone among us to say how long.
O God, how long will those who are against us say cruel things? will the hater go on looking down on your name for ever?
Why are you keeping back your hand, and covering your right hand in your robe?
For from the past God is my King, working salvation in the earth.
The sea was parted in two by your strength; the heads of the great sea-beasts were broken.
The heads of the great snake were crushed by you; you gave them as food to the fishes of the sea.
You made valleys for fountains and springs; you made the ever-flowing rivers dry.
The day is yours and the night is yours: you made the light and the sun.
By you all the limits of the earth were fixed; you have made summer and winter.
Keep this in mind, O Lord, that your haters have said cruel things, and that your name has been looked down on by a people of evil behaviour.
O give not the soul of your dove to the hawk; let not the life of the poor go out of your memory for ever.
Keep in mind your undertaking; for the dark places of the earth are full of pride and cruel acts.
O let not the crushed be turned back in shame; let the low man and the poor give praise to your name.
Up! O God, be the judge of your cause; keep in mind the bitter things which the man of evil behaviour says against you every day.
Keep in mind the voice of your haters; the outcry of those who come against you goes up every day.To the chief music-maker; put to Al-tashheth. A Psalm. Of Asaph. A Song.
To you, O God, we give praise, to you we give praise: and those who give honour to your name make clear your works of power.
When the right time has come, I will be the judge in righteousness.
When the earth and all its people become feeble, I am the support of its pillars. (Selah.)
I say to the men of pride, Let your pride be gone: and to the sinners, Let not your horn be lifted up.
Let not your horn be lifted up: let no more words of pride come from your outstretched necks.
For honour does not come from the east, or from the west, or uplifting from the south;
But God is the judge, putting down one, and lifting up another.
For in the hand of the Lord is a cup, and the wine is red; it is well mixed, overflowing from his hand: he will make all the sinners of the earth take of it, even to the last drop.
But I will ever be full of joy, making songs of praise to the God of Jacob.
By him will all the horns of the sinners be cut off; but the horns of the upright will be lifted up.To the chief music-maker; put to Neginoth. A Psalm. Of Asaph. A Song.
In Judah is the knowledge of God; his name is great in Israel,
In Salem is his tent, his resting-place in Zion.
There were the arrows of the bow broken, there he put an end to body-cover, sword, and fight. (Selah.)
You are shining and full of glory, more than the eternal mountains.
Gone is the wealth of the strong, their last sleep has overcome them; the men of war have become feeble.
At the voice of your wrath, O God of Jacob, deep sleep has overcome carriage and horse.
You, you are to be feared; who may keep his place before you in the time of your wrath?
From heaven you gave your decision; the earth, in its fear, gave no sound,
When God took his place as judge, for the salvation of the poor on the earth. (Selah.)
The ... will give you praise; the rest of ...
Give to the Lord your God what is his by right; let all who are round him give offerings to him who is to be feared.
He puts an end to the wrath of rulers; he is feared by the kings of the earth.To the chief music-maker. After Jeduthun. Of Asaph. A Psalm.
I was crying to God with my voice; even to God with my voice, and he gave ear to me.
In the day of my trouble, my heart was turned to the Lord: my hand was stretched out in the night without resting; my soul would not be comforted.
I will keep God in memory, with sounds of grief; my thoughts are troubled, and my spirit is overcome. (Selah.)
You keep my eyes from sleep; I am so troubled that no words come.
My thoughts go back to the days of the past, to the years which are gone.
The memory of my song comes back to me in the night; my thoughts are moving in my heart; my spirit is searching with care.
Will the Lord put me away for ever? will he be kind no longer?
Is his mercy quite gone for ever? has his word come to nothing?
Has God put away the memory of his pity? are his mercies shut up by his wrath? (Selah.)
And I said, It is a weight on my spirit; but I will keep in mind the years of the right hand of the Most High.
I will keep in mind the works of Jah: I will keep the memory of your wonders in the past.
I will give thought to all your work, while my mind goes over your acts of power.
Your way, O God, is holy: what god is so great as our God?
You are the God who does works of power: you have made your strength clear to the nations.
With your arm you have made your people free, the sons of Jacob and Joseph. (Selah.)
The waters saw you, O God; the waters saw you, they were in fear: even the deep was troubled.
The clouds sent out water; the skies gave out a sound; truly, your arrows went far and wide.
The voice of your thunder went rolling on; the world was flaming with the light of the storm; the earth was shaking.
Your way was in the sea, and your road in the great waters; there was no knowledge of your footsteps.
You were guiding your people like a flock, by the hand of Moses and Aaron.Maschil. Of Asaph.
Give ear, O my people, to my law; let your ears be bent down to the words of my mouth.
Opening my mouth I will give out a story, even the dark sayings of old times;
Which have come to our hearing and our knowledge, as they were given to us by our fathers.
We will not keep them secret from our children; we will make clear to the coming generation the praises of the Lord and his strength, and the great works of wonder which he has done.
He put up a witness in Jacob, and made a law in Israel; which he gave to our fathers so that they might give knowledge of them to their children;
So that the generation to come might have knowledge of them, even the children of the future, who would give word of them to their children;
So that they might put their hope in God, and not let God's works go out of their minds, but keep his laws;
And not be like their fathers, a stiff-necked and uncontrolled generation; a generation whose heart was hard, whose spirit was not true to God.
The children of Ephraim, armed with bows, were turned back on the day of the fight.
They were not ruled by God's word, and they would not go in the way of his law;
They let his works go out of their memory, and the wonders which he had made them see.
He did great works before the eyes of their fathers, in the land of Egypt, in the fields of Zoan.
The sea was cut in two so that they might go through; the waters were massed together on this side and on that.
In the daytime he was guiding them in the cloud, and all through the night with a light of fire.
The rocks of the waste land were broken by his power, and he gave them drink as out of the deep waters.
He made streams come out of the rock; and waters came flowing down like rivers.
And they went on sinning against him even more, turning away from the Most High in the waste land;
Testing God in their hearts, requesting meat for their desire.
They said bitter words against God, saying, Is God able to make ready a table in the waste land?
See, the rock was cut open by his power, so that the water came rushing out, and overflowing streams; is he able to give us bread? is he able to get meat for his people?
So these things came to the Lord's ears, and he was angry; and a fire was lighted against Jacob, and wrath came up against Israel;
Because they had no faith in God, and no hope in his salvation.
And he gave orders to the clouds on high, and the doors of heaven were open;
And he sent down manna like rain for their food, and gave them the grain of heaven.
Man took part in the food of strong ones; he sent them meat in full measure.
He sent an east wind from heaven, driving on the south wind by his power.
He sent down meat on them like dust, and feathered birds like the sand of the sea,
And he let it come down into their resting-place, round about their tents.
So they had food and were full; for he gave them their desire;
But they were not turned from their desires; and while the food was still in their mouths,
The wrath of God came on them, and put to death the fattest of them, and put an end to the young men of Israel.
For all this they went on sinning even more, and had no faith in his great wonders.
So their days were wasted like a breath, and their years in trouble.
When he sent death on them, then they made search for him; turning to him and looking for him with care;
In the memory that God was their Rock, and the Most High God their saviour.
But their lips were false to him, and their tongues were untrue to him;
And their hearts were not right with him, and they did not keep their agreement with him.
But he, being full of pity, has forgiveness for sin, and does not put an end to man: frequently turning back his wrath, and not being violently angry.
So he kept in mind that they were only flesh; a breath which is quickly gone, and will not come again.
How frequently did they go against him in the waste land, and give him cause for grief in the dry places!
Again they put God to the test, and gave pain to the Holy One of Israel.
They did not keep in mind the work of his hand, or the day when he took them from the power of their haters;
How he had done his signs in Egypt, and his wonders in the field of Zoan;
So that their rivers were turned to blood, and they were not able to get drink from their streams.
He sent different sorts of flies among them, poisoning their flesh; and frogs for their destruction.
He gave the increase of their fields to worms, the fruits of their industry to the locusts.
He sent ice for the destruction of their vines; their trees were damaged by the bitter cold.
Ice was rained down on their cattle; thunderstorms sent destruction among the flocks.
He sent on them the heat of his wrath, his bitter disgust, letting loose evil angels among them.
He let his wrath have its way; he did not keep back their soul from death, but gave their life to disease.
He gave to destruction all the first sons of Egypt; the first-fruits of their strength in the tents of Ham;
But he took his people out like sheep, guiding them in the waste land like a flock.
He took them on safely so that they had no fear; but their haters were covered by the sea.
And he was their guide to his holy land, even to the mountain, which his right hand had made his;
Driving out nations before them, marking out the line of their heritage, and giving the people of Israel their tents for a resting-place.
But they were bitter against the Most High God, testing him, and not keeping his laws;
Their hearts were turned back and untrue like their fathers; they were turned to one side like a twisted bow.
They made him angry with their high places; moving him to wrath with their images.
When this came to God's ears he was very angry, and gave up Israel completely;
So that he went away from the holy place in Shiloh, the tent which he had put among men;
And he let his strength be taken prisoner, and gave his glory into the hands of his hater.
He gave his people up to the sword, and was angry with his heritage.
Their young men were burned in the fire; and their virgins were not praised in the bride-song.
Their priests were put to death by the sword, and their widows made no weeping for them.
Then was the Lord like one awaking from sleep, and like a strong man crying out because of wine.
His haters were turned back by his blows and shamed for ever.
And he put the tent of Joseph on one side, and took not the tribe of Ephraim;
But he took the tribe of Judah for himself, and the mountain of Zion, in which he had pleasure.
And he made his holy place like the high heaven, like the earth which is fixed by him for ever.
He took David to be his servant, taking him from the place of the flocks;
From looking after the sheep which were giving milk, he took him to give food to Jacob his people, and to Israel his heritage.
So he gave them food with an upright heart, guiding them by the wisdom of his hands.A Psalm. Of Asaph.
O God, the nations have come into your heritage; they have made your holy Temple unclean; they have made Jerusalem a mass of broken walls.
They have given the bodies of your servants as food to the birds of the air, and the flesh of your saints to the beasts of the earth.
Their blood has been flowing like water round about Jerusalem; there was no one to put them in their last resting-place.
We are looked down on by our neighbours, we are laughed at and made sport of by those who are round us.
How long, O Lord? will you be angry for ever? will your wrath go on burning like fire?
Let your wrath be on the nations who have no knowledge of you, and on the kingdoms who have not made prayer to your name.
For they have taken Jacob for their meat, and made waste his house.
Do not keep in mind against us the sins of our fathers; let your mercy come to us quickly, for we have been made very low.
Give us help, O God of our salvation, for the glory of your name; take us out of danger and give us forgiveness for our sins, because of your name.
Why may the nations say, Where is their God? Let payment for the blood of your servants be made openly among the nations before our eyes.
Let the cry of the prisoner come before you; with your strong arm make free the children of death;
And give punishment seven times over into the breast of our neighbours for the bitter words which they have said against you, O Lord.
So we your people, and the sheep of your flock, will give you glory for ever: we will go on praising you through all generations.To the chief music-maker; put to Shoshannim-eduth. Of Asaph. A Psalm.
Give ear, O Keeper of Israel, guiding Joseph like a flock; you who have your seat on the winged ones, let your glory be seen.
Before Ephraim and Benjamin and Manasseh, let your strength be awake from sleep, and come as our salvation.
Take us back again, O God; let us see the shining of your face, and let us be safe.
O Lord God of armies, how long will your wrath be burning against the rest of your people?
You have given them the bread of weeping for food; for their drink you have given them sorrow in great measure.
You make us a cause of war among our neighbours; our haters are laughing at us among themselves.
Take us back again, O God of armies; let us see the shining of your face, and let us be safe.
You took a vine out of Egypt: driving out the nations, and planting it in their land.
You made ready a place for it, so that it might take deep root, and it sent out its branches over all the land.
The mountains were covered with its shade, and the great trees with its branches.
It sent out its arms to the Sea, and its branches to the River.
Why are its walls broken down by your hands, so that all who go by may take its fruit?
It is uprooted by the pigs from the woods, the beasts of the field get their food from it.
Come back, O God of armies: from heaven let your eyes be turned to this vine, and give your mind to it,
Even to the tree which was planted by your right hand, and to the branch which you made strong for yourself.
It is burned with fire; it is cut down: they are made waste by the wrath of your face.
Let your hand be on the man of your right hand, on the son of man whom you made strong for yourself.
So will we not be turned back from you; keep us in life, and we will give praise to your name.
Take us back, O Lord God of armies; let us see the shining of your face, and let us be safe.To the chief music-maker; put to the Gittith. Of Asaph.
Make a song to God our strength: make a glad cry to the God of Jacob.
Take up the melody, playing on an instrument of music, even on corded instruments.
Let the horn be sounded in the time of the new moon, at the full moon, on our holy feast-day:
For this is a rule for Israel, and a law of the God of Jacob.
He gave it to Joseph as a witness, when he went out over the land of Egypt; then the words of a strange tongue were sounding in my ears.
I took the weight from his back; his hands were made free from the baskets.
You gave a cry in your trouble, and I made you free; I gave you an answer in the secret place of the thunder; I put you to the test at the waters of Meribah. (Selah.)
Give ear, O my people, and I will give you my word, O Israel, if you will only do as I say!
There is to be no strange god among you; you are not to give worship to any other god.
I am the Lord your God, who took you up from the land of Egypt: let your mouth be open wide, so that I may give you food.
But my people did not give ear to my voice; Israel would have nothing to do with me.
So I gave them up to the desires of their hearts; that they might go after their evil purposes.
If only my people would give ear to me, walking in my ways!
I would quickly overcome their haters: my hand would be turned against those who make war on them.
The haters of the Lord would be broken, and their destruction would be eternal.
I would give them the best grain for food; you would be full of honey from the rock.A Psalm. Of Asaph.
God is in the meeting-place of God; he is judging among the gods.
How long will you go on judging falsely, having respect for the persons of evil-doers? (Selah.)
Give ear to the cause of the poor and the children without fathers; let those who are troubled and in need have their rights.
Be the saviour of the poor and those who have nothing: take them out of the hand of the evil-doers.
They have no knowledge or sense; they go about in the dark: all the bases of the earth are moved.
I said, You are gods; all of you are the sons of the Most High:
But you will come to death like men, falling like one of the rulers of the earth.
Up! O God, come as judge of the earth; for all the nations are your heritage.A Song. A Psalm. Of Asaph.
O God, do not keep quiet: let your lips be open and take no rest, O God.
For see! those who make war on you are out of control; your haters are lifting up their heads.
They have made wise designs against your people, talking together against those whom you keep in a secret place.
They have said, Come, let us put an end to them as a nation; so that the name of Israel may go out of man's memory.
For they have all come to an agreement; they are all joined together against you:
The tents of Edom and the Ishmaelites; Moab and the Hagarites;
Gebal and Ammon and Amalek; the Philistines and the people of Tyre;
Assur is joined with them; they have become the support of the children of Lot. (Selah.)
Do to them what you did to the Midianites; what you did to Sisera and Jabin, at the stream of Kishon:
Who came to destruction at En-dor; their bodies became dust and waste.
Make their chiefs like Oreb and Zeeb; and all their rulers like Zebah and Zalmunna:
Who have said, Let us take for our heritage the resting-place of God.
O my God, make them like the rolling dust; like dry stems before the wind.
As fire burning a wood, and as a flame causing fire on the mountains,
So go after them with your strong wind, and let them be full of fear because of your storm.
Let their faces be full of shame; so that they may give honour to your name, O Lord.
Let them be overcome and troubled for ever; let them be put to shame and come to destruction;
So that men may see that you only, whose name is Yahweh, are Most High over all the earth.To the chief music-maker; put to the Gittith A Psalm. Of the sons of Korah.
How dear are your tents, O Lord of armies!
The passion of my soul's desire is for the house of the Lord; my heart and my flesh are crying out for the living God.
The little birds have places for themselves, where they may put their young, even your altars, O Lord of armies, my King and my God.
Happy are they whose resting-place is in your house: they will still be praising you. (Selah.)
Happy is the man whose strength is in you; in whose heart are the highways to Zion.
Going through the valley of balsam-trees, they make it a place of springs; it is clothed with blessings by the early rain.
They go from strength to strength; every one of them comes before God in Zion.
O Lord God of armies, let my prayer come to you: give ear, O God of Jacob. (Selah.)
O God, let your eyes be on him who is our safe cover, and let your heart be turned to your king.
For a day in your house is better than a thousand. It is better to be a door-keeper in the house of my God, than to be living in the tents of sin.
The Lord God is our sun and our strength: the Lord will give grace and glory: he will not keep back any good thing from those whose ways are upright.
O Lord of armies, happy is the man whose hope is in you.To the chief music-maker. A Psalm. Of the sons of Korah.
Lord, you were good to your land: changing the fate of Jacob.
The wrongdoing of your people had forgiveness; all their sin had been covered. (Selah.)
You were no longer angry: you were turned from the heat of your wrath.
Come back to us, O God of our salvation, and be angry with us no longer.
Will you go on being angry with us for ever? will you keep your wrath against us through all the long generations?
Will you not give us life again, so that your people may be glad in you?
Let us see your mercy, O Lord, and give us your salvation.
I will give ear to the voice of the Lord; for he will say words of peace to his people and to his saints; but let them not go back to their foolish ways.
Truly, his salvation is near to his worshippers; so that glory may be in our land.
Mercy and faith have come together; righteousness and peace have given one another a kiss.
Faith comes up from the earth like a plant; righteousness is looking down from heaven.
The Lord will give what is good; and our land will give its increase.
Righteousness will go before him, making a way for his footsteps.A Prayer. Of David.
Let your ears be open to my voice, O Lord, and give me an answer; for I am poor and in need.
Keep my soul, for I am true to you; O my God, give salvation to your servant, whose hope is in you.
Have mercy on me, O Lord; for my cry goes up to you all the day.
Make glad the soul of your servant; for it is lifted up to you, O Lord.
You are good, O Lord, and full of forgiveness; your mercy is great to all who make their cry to you.
O Lord, give ear to my prayer; and take note of the sound of my requests.
In the day of my trouble I send up my cry to you; for you will give me an answer.
There is no god like you, O Lord; there are no works like your works.
Let all the nations whom you have made come and give worship to you, O Lord, giving glory to your name.
For you are great, and do great works of wonder; you only are God.
Make your way clear to me, O Lord; I will go on my way in your faith: let my heart be glad in the fear of your name.
I will give you praise, O Lord my God, with all my heart; I will give glory to your name for ever.
For your mercy to me is great; you have taken my soul up from the deep places of the underworld.
O God, men of pride have come up against me, and the army of violent men would take my life; they have not put you before them.
But you, O Lord, are a God full of pity and forgiveness, slow to get angry, great in mercy and wisdom.
O be turned to me and have mercy on me: give your strength to your servant, and your salvation to the son of her who is your servant.
Give me a sign for good; so that my haters may see it and be shamed; because you, Lord, have been my help and comfort.Of the sons of Korah. A Psalm. A Song.
This house is resting on the holy mountain.
The Lord has more love for the doors of Zion than for all the tents of Jacob.
Noble things are said of you, O town of God. (Selah.)
Rahab and Babylon will be named among those who have knowledge of me; see, Philistia and Tyre, with Ethiopia; this man had his birth there.
And of Zion it will be said, This or that man had his birth there; and the Most High will make her strong.
The Lord will keep in mind, when he is writing the records of the people, that this man had his birth there. (Selah.)
The players on instruments will be there, and the dancers will say, All my springs are in you.A Song. A Psalm. Of the sons of Korah. To the chief music-maker; put to Mahalath Leannoth. Maschil. Of Heman the Ezrahite.
O Lord, God of my salvation, I have been crying to you for help by day and by night:
Let my prayer come before you; give ear to my cry:
For my soul is full of evils, and my life has come near to the underworld.
I am numbered among those who go down into the earth; I have become like a man for whom there is no help:
My soul is among the dead, like those in the underworld, to whom you give no more thought; for they are cut off from your care.
You have put me in the lowest deep, even in dark places.
The weight of your wrath is crushing me, all your waves have overcome me. (Selah.)
You have sent my friends far away from me; you have made me a disgusting thing in their eyes: I am shut up, and not able to come out.
My eyes are wasting away because of my trouble: Lord, my cry has gone up to you every day, my hands are stretched out to you.
Will you do works of wonder for the dead? will the shades come back to give you praise? (Selah.)
Will the story of your mercy be given in the house of the dead? will news of your faith come to the place of destruction?
May there be knowledge of your wonders in the dark? or of your righteousness where memory is dead?
But to you did I send up my cry, O Lord; in the morning my prayer came before you.
Lord, why have you sent away my soul? why is your face covered from me?
I have been troubled and in fear of death from the time when I was young; your wrath is hard on me, and I have no strength.
The heat of your wrath has gone over me; I am broken by your cruel punishments.
They are round me all the day like water; they have made a circle about me.
You have sent my friends and lovers far from me; I am gone from the memory of those who are dear to me.Maschil. Of Ethan the Ezrahite.
My song will be of the mercies of the Lord for ever: with my mouth will I make his faith clear to all generations.
For you have said, Mercy will be made strong for ever; my faith will be unchanging in the heavens.
I have made an agreement with the man of my selection, I have made an oath to David my servant;
I will make your seed go on for ever, your kingdom will be strong through all generations. (Selah.)
In heaven let them give praise for your wonders, O Lord; and your unchanging faith among the saints.
For who is there in the heavens in comparison with the Lord? who is like the Lord among the sons of the gods?
God is greatly to be feared among the saints, and to be honoured over all those who are about him.
O Lord God of armies, who is strong like you, O Jah? and your unchanging faith is round about you.
You have rule over the sea in storm; when its waves are troubled, you make them calm.
Rahab was crushed by you like one wounded to death; with your strong arm you put to flight all your haters.
Yours are the heavens, and the earth is yours; you have made the world, and everything which is in it.
You have made the north and the south; Tabor and Hermon are sounding with joy at your name.
Yours is an arm of power; strong is your hand and high your right hand.
The seat of your kingdom is resting on righteousness and right judging: mercy and good faith come before your face.
Happy are the people who have knowledge of the holy cry: the light of your face, O Lord, will be shining on their way.
In your name will they have joy all the day: in your righteousness will they be lifted up.
For you are the glory of their strength; in your pleasure will our horn be lifted up.
For our breastplate is the Lord; and our king is the Holy One of Israel's.
Then your voice came to your holy one in a vision, saying, I have put the crown on a strong one, lifting up one taken from among the people.
I have made discovery of David my servant; I have put my holy oil on his head.
My hand will be his support; my arm will give him strength.
The deceit of those who are against him will not overcome him; he will not be troubled by the sons of evil.
I will have those who are against him broken before his face, and his haters will be crushed under my blows.
But my faith and my mercy will be with him; and in my name will his horn be lifted up.
I will put his hand in the sea, and his right hand in the rivers.
He will say to me, You are my father, my God, and the Rock of my salvation.
And I will make him the first of my sons, most high over the kings of the earth.
I will keep my mercy for him for ever; my agreement with him will not be changed.
His seed will keep their place for ever; his kingdom will be eternal, like the heavens.
If his children give up my law, and are not ruled by my decisions;
If my rules are broken, and my orders are not kept;
Then I will send punishment on them for their sin; my rod will be the reward of their evil-doing.
But I will not take away my mercy from him, and will not be false to my faith.
I will be true to my agreement; the things which have gone out of my lips will not be changed.
I have made an oath once by my holy name, that I will not be false to David.
His seed will not come to an end for ever; the seat of his kingdom will be like the sun before me.
It will be fixed for ever like the moon; and the witness in heaven is true. (Selah.)
But you have put him away in disgust; you have been angry with the king of your selection.
You have made your agreement with your servant of no effect: you have had no respect for his crown, it has come down even to the earth.
All his walls are broken down; you have given his strong towers to destruction.
All those who come by take away his goods; he is laughed at by his neighbours.
You have given power to the right hand of his haters; you have made glad all those who are against him.
His sword is turned back; you have not been his support in the fight.
You have put an end to his glory: the seat of his kingdom has been levelled to the earth.
You have made him old before his time; he is covered with shame. (Selah.)
How long, O Lord, will you Keep yourself for ever from our eyes? how long will your wrath be burning like fire?
See how short my time is; why have you made all men for no purpose?
What man now living will not see death? will he be able to keep back his soul from the underworld? (Selah.)
Lord, where are your earlier mercies? where is the oath which you made to David in unchanging faith?
Keep in mind, O Lord, the shame of your servants, and how the bitter words of all the people have come into my heart;
The bitter words of your haters, O Lord, shaming the footsteps of your king.
Let the Lord be praised for ever. So be it, So be it.A Prayer of Moses, the man of God.
Lord, you have been our resting-place in all generations.
Before the mountains were made, before you had given birth to the earth and the world, before time was, and for ever, you are God.
You send man back to his dust; and say, Go back, you children of men.
For to you a thousand years are no more than yesterday when it is past, and like a watch in the night.
...
In the morning it is green; in the evening it is cut down, and becomes dry.
We are burned up by the heat of your passion, and troubled by your wrath.
You have put our evil doings before you, our secret sins in the light of your face.
For all our days have gone by in your wrath; our years come to an end like a breath.
The measure of our life is seventy years; and if through strength it may be eighty years, its pride is only trouble and sorrow, for it comes to an end and we are quickly gone.
Who has knowledge of the power of your wrath, or who takes note of the weight of your passion?
So give us knowledge of the number of our days, that we may get a heart of wisdom.
Come back, O Lord; how long? let your purpose for your servants be changed.
In the morning give us your mercy in full measure; so that we may have joy and delight all our days.
Make us glad in reward for the days of our sorrow, and for the years in which we have seen evil.
Make your work clear to your servants, and your glory to their children.
Let the pleasure of the Lord our God be on us: O Lord, give strength to the work of our hands.Happy is he whose resting-place is in the secret of the Lord, and under the shade of the wings of the Most High;
Who says of the Lord, He is my safe place and my tower of strength: he is my God, in whom is my hope.
He will take you out of the bird-net, and keep you safe from wasting disease.
You will be covered by his feathers; under his wings you will be safe: his good faith will be your salvation.
You will have no fear of the evil things of the night, or of the arrow in flight by day,
Or of the disease which takes men in the dark, or of the destruction which makes waste when the sun is high.
You will see a thousand falling by your side, and ten thousand at your right hand; but it will not come near you.
Only with your eyes will you see the reward of the evil-doers.
Because you have said, I am in the hands of the Lord, the Most High is my safe resting- place;
No evil will come on you, and no disease will come near your tent.
For he will give you into the care of his angels to keep you wherever you go.
In their hands they will keep you up, so that your foot may not be crushed against a stone.
You will put your foot on the lion and the snake; the young lion and the great snake will be crushed under your feet.
Because he has given me his love, I will take him out of danger: I will put him in a place of honour, because he has kept my name in his heart.
When his cry comes up to me, I will give him an answer: I will be with him in trouble; I will make him free from danger and give him honour.
With long life will he be rewarded; and I will let him see my salvation.A Psalm. A Song for the Sabbath.
It is a good thing to give praise to the Lord, and to make melody to your name, O Most High;
To make clear your mercy in the morning, and your unchanging faith every night;
On a ten-corded instrument, and on an instrument of music with a quiet sound.
For you, O Lord, have made me glad through your work; I will have joy in the works of your hands.
O Lord, how great are your works! and your thoughts are very deep.
A man without sense has no knowledge of this; and a foolish man may not take it in.
When the sinners come up like the grass, and all the workers of evil do well for themselves, it is so that their end may be eternal destruction.
But you, O Lord, are on high for ever.
For see! your haters, O Lord, will be put to death; all the workers of evil will be put to flight;
But my horn is lifted up like the horn of the ox: the best oil is flowing on my head.
My eyes have seen trouble come on my haters; my ears have news of the fate of the evil-doers who have come up against me.
The good man will be like a tall tree in his strength; his growth will be as the wide- stretching trees of Lebanon.
Those who are planted in the house of the Lord will come up tall and strong in his gardens.
They will give fruit even when they are old; they will be fertile and full of growth;
For a sign that the Lord is upright; he is my Rock, there is no deceit in him.The Lord is King; he is clothed with glory; the Lord is clothed with strength; power is the cord of his robe; the world is fixed, so that it may not be moved.
The seat of your power has been from the past; you are eternal.
The rivers send up, O Lord, the rivers send up their voices; they send them up with a loud cry.
The Lord in heaven is stronger than the noise of great waters, yes, he is stronger than the great waves of the sea.
Your witness is most certain; it is right for your house to be holy, O Lord, for ever.O God, in whose hands is punishment, O God of punishment, let your shining face be seen.
Be lifted up, O judge of the earth; let their reward come to the men of pride.
How long will sinners, O Lord, how long will sinners have joy over us?
Words of pride come from their lips; all the workers of evil say great things of themselves.
Your people are crushed by them, O Lord, your heritage is troubled,
They put to death the widow and the guest, they take the lives of children who have no father;
And they say, Jah will not see it, the God of Jacob will not give thought to it.
Give your mind to my words, you who are without wisdom among the people; you foolish men, when will you be wise?
Has he by whom your ears were planted no hearing? or is he blind by whom your eyes were formed?
He who is the judge of the nations, will he not give men the reward of their acts, even he who gives knowledge to man?
The Lord has knowledge of the thoughts of man, for they are only a breath.
Happy is the man who is guided by you, O Jah, and to whom you give teaching out of your law;
So that you may give him rest from the days of evil, till a hole is made ready for the destruction of the sinners.
The Lord will not give up his people, or take away his support from his heritage;
But decisions will again be made in righteousness; and they will be kept by all whose hearts are true.
Who will give me help against the sinners? and who will be my support against the workers of evil?
If the Lord had not been my helper, my soul would quickly have gone down into death.
If I say, My foot is slipping; your mercy, O Lord, is my support.
Among all my troubled thoughts, your comforts are the delight of my soul.
What part with you has the seat of sin, which makes evil into a law?
They are banded together against the soul of the upright, to give decisions against those who have done no wrong.
But the Lord is my safe resting-place; my God is the Rock where I am safe.
And he has made their evil designs come back on themselves, cutting them off in their sin; the Lord our God will put an end to them.O come, let us make songs to the Lord; sending up glad voices to the Rock of our salvation.
Let us come before his face with praises; and make melody with holy songs.
For the Lord is a great God, and a great King over all gods.
The deep places of the earth are in his hand; and the tops of the mountains are his.
The sea is his, and he made it; and the dry land was formed by his hands.
O come, let us give worship, falling down on our knees before the Lord our Maker.
For he is our God; and we are the people to whom he gives food, and the sheep of his flock. Today, if you would only give ear to his voice!
Let not your hearts be hard, as at Meribah, as in the day of Massah in the waste land;
When your fathers put me to the test and saw my power and my work.
For forty years I was angry with this generation, and said, They are a people whose hearts are turned away from me, for they have no knowledge of my ways;
And I made an oath in my wrath, that they might not come into my place of rest.O make a new song to the Lord; let all the earth make melody to the Lord.
Make songs to the Lord, blessing his name; give the good news of his salvation day by day.
Make clear his glory to the nations, and his wonders to all the peoples.
For the Lord is great, and greatly to be praised; he is more to be feared than all other gods.
For all the gods of the nations are false gods; but the Lord made the heavens.
Honour and glory are before him: strong and fair is his holy place.
Give to the Lord, O you families of the peoples, give to the Lord glory and strength.
Give to the Lord the glory of his name; take with you an offering and come into his house.
O give worship to the Lord in holy robes; be in fear before him, all the earth.
Say among the nations, The Lord is King; yes, the world is ordered so that it may not be moved; he will be an upright judge of the peoples.
Let the heavens have joy and the earth be glad; let the sea be thundering with all its waters;
Let the field be glad, and everything which is in it; yes, let all the trees of the wood be sounding with joy,
Before the Lord, for he is come; he is come to be the judge of the earth; the earth will be judged in righteousness, and the peoples with unchanging faith.The Lord is King, let the earth have joy; let all the sea-lands be glad.
Dark clouds are round him; his kingdom is based on righteousness and right judging.
Fire goes before him, burning up all those who are against him round about.
His bright flames give light to the world; the earth saw it with fear.
The mountains became like wax at the coming of the Lord, at the coming of the Lord of all the earth.
The heavens gave out the news of his righteousness, and all the people saw his glory.
Shamed be all those who give worship to images, and take pride in false gods; give him worship, all you gods.
Zion gave ear and was glad; and the daughters of Judah were full of joy, because of your decisions, O Lord.
For you, Lord, are most high over the earth; you are lifted up over all other gods.
You who are lovers of the Lord, be haters of evil; he keeps the souls of his saints; he takes them out of the hand of sinners.
Light is shining on the lovers of righteousness, and for the upright in heart there is joy.
Be glad in the Lord, you upright men; praising the memory of his holy name.The Lord is King; let the peoples be in fear: his seat is on the winged ones; let the earth be moved.
The Lord is great in Zion; he is high over all the nations.
Let them give praise to your name, for it is great and to be feared; holy is he.
The king's power is used for righteousness; you give true decisions, judging rightly in the land of Jacob.
Give high honour to the Lord our God, worshipping at his feet; holy is he.
Moses and Aaron among his priests, and Samuel among those who gave honour to his name; they made prayers to the Lord, and he gave answers to them.
His voice came to them from the pillar of cloud; they kept his witness, and the law which he gave them.
You gave them an answer, O Lord our God; you took away their sin, though you gave them punishment for their wrongdoing.
Give high honour to the Lord our God, worshipping with your faces turned to his holy hill; for the Lord our God is holy.A Psalm. Of David.
I will make a song of mercy and righteousness; to you, O Lord, will I make melody.
I will do wisely in the way of righteousness: O when will you come to me? I will be walking in my house with a true heart.
I will not put any evil thing before my eyes; I am against all turning to one side; I will not have it near me.
The false heart I will send away from me: I will not have an evil-doer for a friend.
I will put to death anyone who says evil of his neighbour secretly; the man with a high look and a heart of pride is disgusting to me.
My eyes will be on those of good faith in the land, so that they may be living in my house; he who is walking in the right way will be my servant.
The worker of deceit will not come into my house; the false man will have no place before my eyes.
Morning by morning will I put to death all the sinners in the land, so that all evil-doers may be cut off from Jerusalem.Of David.
Give praise to the Lord, O my soul; let everything in me give praise to his holy name.
Give praise to the Lord, O my soul; let not all his blessings go from your memory.
He has forgiveness for all your sins; he takes away all your diseases;
He keeps back your life from destruction, crowning you with mercy and grace.
He makes your mouth full of good things, so that your strength is made new again like the eagle's.
The Lord gives decisions in righteousness for all who are in trouble.
He gave knowledge of his way to Moses, and made his acts clear to the children of Israel.
The Lord is kind and full of pity, not quickly made angry, but ever ready to have mercy.
His feeling will no longer be bitter; he will not keep his wrath for ever.
He has not given us the punishment for our sins, or the reward of our wrongdoing.
For as the heaven is high over the earth, so great is his mercy to his worshippers.
As far as the east is from the west, so far has he put our sins from us.
As a father has pity on his children, so the Lord has pity on his worshippers.
For he has knowledge of our feeble frame; he sees that we are only dust.
As for man, his days are as grass: his beautiful growth is like the flower of the field.
The wind goes over it and it is gone; and its place sees it no longer.
But the mercy of the Lord is eternal for his worshippers, and their children's children will see his righteousness;
If they keep his agreement, and have his laws in mind to do them.
The Lord has made ready his high seat in the heavens; his kingdom is ruling over all.
Give praise to the Lord, you his angels, who are great in strength, doing his orders, and waiting for his voice.
Give praise to the Lord, all you his armies; and you his servants who do his pleasure.
Give praise to the Lord, all his works, in all places under his rule: give praise to the Lord, O my soul.Give praise to the Lord, O my soul. O Lord my God, you are very great; you are robed with honour and power.
You are clothed with light as with a robe; stretching out the heavens like a curtain:
The arch of your house is based on the waters; you make the clouds your carriage; you go on the wings of the wind:
He makes winds his angels, and flames of fire his servants.
He has made the earth strong on its bases, so that it may not be moved for ever and ever;
Covering it with the sea as with a robe: the waters were high over the mountains;
At the voice of your word they went in flight; at the sound of your thunder they went away in fear;
The mountains came up and the valleys went down into the place which you had made ready for them.
You made a limit over which they might not go, so that the earth would never again be covered by them.
You sent the springs into the valleys; they are flowing between the hills.
They give drink to every beast of the field; the mountain asses come to them for water.
The birds of the air have their resting-places by them, and make their song among the branches.
He sends down rain from his store-houses on the hills: the earth is full of the fruit of his works.
He makes the grass come up for the cattle, and plants for the use of man; so that bread may come out of the earth;
And wine to make glad the heart of man, and oil to make his face shining, and bread giving strength to his heart.
The trees of the Lord are full of growth, the cedars of Lebanon of his planting;
Where the birds have their resting-places; as for the stork, the tall trees are her house.
The high hills are a safe place for the mountain goats, and the rocks for the small beasts.
He made the moon for a sign of the divisions of the year; teaching the sun the time of its going down.
When you make it dark, it is night, when all the beasts of the woods come quietly out of their secret places.
The young lions go thundering after their food; searching for their meat from God.
The sun comes up, and they come together, and go back to their secret places to take their rest.
Man goes out to his work, and to his business, till the evening.
O Lord, how great is the number of your works! in wisdom you have made them all; the earth is full of the things you have made.
There is the great, wide sea, where there are living things, great and small, more than may be numbered.
There go the ships; there is that great beast, which you have made as a plaything.
All of them are waiting for you, to give them their food in its time.
They take what you give them; they are full of the good things which come from your open hand.
If your face is veiled, they are troubled; when you take away their breath, they come to an end, and go back to the dust.
If you send out your spirit, they are given life; you make new the face of the earth.
Let the glory of the Lord be for ever; let the Lord have joy in his works:
At whose look the earth is shaking; at whose touch the mountains send out smoke.
I will make songs to the Lord all my life; I will make melody to my God while I have my being.
Let my thoughts be sweet to him: I will be glad in the Lord.
Let sinners be cut off from the earth, and let all evil-doers come to an end. Give praise to the Lord, O my soul. Give praise to the Lord.O give praise to the Lord; give honour to his name, talking of his doings among the peoples.
Let your voice be sounding in songs and melody; let all your thoughts be of the wonder of his works.
Have glory in his holy name; let the hearts of those who are searching after the Lord be glad.
Let your search be for the Lord and for his strength; let your hearts ever be turned to him.
Keep in mind the great works which he has done; his wonders, and the decisions of his mouth;
O you seed of Abraham, his servant, you children of Jacob, his loved ones.
He is the Lord our God: he is judge of all the earth.
He has kept his agreement in mind for ever, the word which he gave for a thousand generations;
The agreement which he made with Abraham, and his oath to Isaac;
And he gave it to Jacob for a law, and to Israel for an eternal agreement;
Saying, To you will I give the land of Canaan, the measured line of your heritage:
When they were still small in number, and strange in the land;
When they went about from one nation to another, and from one kingdom to another people.
He would not let anyone do them wrong; he even kept back kings because of them,
Saying, Put not your hand on those who have been marked with my holy oil, and do my prophets no wrong.
And he took away all food from the land, so that the people were without bread.
He sent a man before them, even Joseph, who was given as a servant for a price:
His feet were fixed in chains; his neck was put in iron bands;
Till the time when his word came true; he was tested by the word of the Lord.
The king sent men to take off his chains; even the ruler of the people, who let him go free.
He made him lord of his house, and ruler over everything he had;
To give his chiefs teaching at his pleasure, and so that his law-givers might get wisdom from him.
Then Israel came into Egypt, and Jacob was living in the land of Ham.
And his people were greatly increased, and became stronger than those who were against them.
Their hearts were turned to hate against his people, so that they made secret designs against them.
He sent Moses, his servant, and Aaron, the man of his selection.
He let his signs be seen among the people, and his wonders in the land of Ham.
He sent black night and made it dark; and they did not go against his word.
At his word their waters were turned to blood, and he sent death on all their fish.
Their land was full of frogs, even in the rooms of the king.
He gave the word, and there came the dog-fly, and insects over all the land.
He gave them ice for rain, and flaming fire in their land.
He gave their vines and their fig-trees to destruction, and the trees of their land were broken down.
At his word the locusts came, and young locusts more than might be numbered,
And put an end to all the plants of their land, taking all the fruit of the earth for food.
He put to death the first child of every family in the land, the first-fruits of their strength.
He took his people out with silver and gold: there was not one feeble person among them.
Egypt was glad when they went; for the fear of them had come down on them.
A cloud was stretched over them for a cover; and he sent fire to give light in the night.
At the people's request he sent birds, and gave them the bread of heaven for food.
His hand made the rock open, and the waters came streaming out; they went down through the dry places like a river.
For he kept in mind his holy word, and Abraham, his servant.
And he took his people out with joy, the men of his selection with glad cries:
And gave them the lands of the nations; and they took the work of the peoples for a heritage;
So that they might keep his orders, and be true to his laws. Give praise to the Lord.Let the Lord be praised. O give praise to the Lord, for he is good: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
Who is able to give an account of the great acts of the Lord, or to make clear all his praise?
Happy are they whose decisions are upright, and he who does righteousness at all times.
Keep me in mind, O Lord, when you are good to your people; O let your salvation come to me;
So that I may see the well-being of the people of your selection, and have a part in the joy of your nation, and take pride in your heritage.
We are sinners like our fathers, we have done wrong, our acts are evil.
Our fathers did not give thought to your wonders in Egypt; they did not keep in memory the great number of your mercies, but gave you cause for wrath at the sea, even at the Red Sea.
But he was their saviour because of his name, so that men might see his great power.
By his word the Red Sea was made dry: and he took them through the deep waters as through the waste land.
And he took them safely out of the hands of their haters, and kept them from the attacks of those who were against them.
And the waters went over their haters; all of them came to an end.
Then they had faith in his words; they gave him songs of praise.
But their memory of his works was short; not waiting to be guided by him,
They gave way to their evil desires in the waste land, and put God to the test in the dry places.
And he gave them their request, but sent a wasting disease into their souls.
They were full of envy against Moses among the tents, and against Aaron, the holy one of the Lord.
The earth opening put an end to Dathan, covering up Abiram and his band.
And a fire was lighted among their tents; the sinners were burned up by the flames.
They made a young ox in Horeb, and gave worship to an image of gold.
And their glory was changed into the image of an ox, whose food is grass.
They had no memory of God their saviour, who had done great things in Egypt;
Works of wonder in the land of Ham, and things of fear by the Red Sea.
And he was purposing to put an end to them if Moses, his special servant, had not gone up before him, between him and his people, turning back his wrath, to keep them from destruction.
They were disgusted with the good land; they had no belief in his word;
Talking against him secretly in their tents, they did not give ear to the voice of the Lord.
So he made an oath against them, to put an end to them in the waste land:
That their children might be mixed among the nations, and sent away into other lands.
And they were joined to Baal-peor, and took part in the offerings to the dead.
So they made him angry by their behaviour; and he sent disease on them.
Then Phinehas got up, and made prayer for them; and the disease went no farther.
And all the generations coming after him kept the memory of his righteousness for ever.
They made God angry again at the waters of Meribah, so that Moses was troubled because of them;
For they made his spirit bitter, and he said unwise things.
They did not put an end to the peoples, as the Lord had said;
But they were joined to the nations, learning their works.
And they gave worship to images; which were a danger to them:
They even made offerings of their sons and their daughters to evil spirits,
And gave the blood of their sons and their daughters who had done no wrong, offering them to the images of Canaan; and the land was made unclean with blood.
So they became unclean through their works, going after their evil desires.
Then the wrath of the Lord was burning against his people, and he was angry with his heritage.
And he gave them into the hands of the nations; and they were ruled by their haters.
By them they were crushed, and made low under their hands.
Again and again he made them free; but their hearts were turned against his purpose, and they were overcome by their sins.
But when their cry came to his ears, he had pity on their trouble:
And kept in mind his agreement with them, and in his great mercy gave them forgiveness.
He put pity into the hearts of those who made them prisoners.
Be our saviour, O Lord our God, and let us come back together from among the nations, so that we may give honour to your holy name, and have glory in your praise.
Praise be to the Lord God of Israel for ever and for ever; and let all the people say, So be it. Give praise to the Lord.O give praise to the Lord, for he is good: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
Let those whose cause the Lord has taken up say so, his people whom he has taken out of the hands of their haters;
Making them come together out of all the lands, from the east and from the west, from the north and from the south.
They were wandering in the waste places; they saw no way to a resting-place.
Their souls became feeble for need of food and drink.
Then they sent up their cry to the Lord in their sorrow, and he gave them salvation out of all their troubles;
Guiding them in the right way, so that they might come into the town of their resting- place.
Let men give praise to the Lord for his mercy, and for the wonders which he does for the children of men!
He gives its desire to the unresting soul, so that it is full of good things.
Those who were in the dark, in the black night, in chains of sorrow and iron;
Because they went against the words of God, and gave no thought to the laws of the Most High:
So that he made their hearts weighted down with grief; they were falling, and had no helper.
Then they sent up their cry to the Lord in their sorrow, and he gave them salvation out of all their troubles.
He took them out of the dark and the black night, and all their chains were broken.
Let men give praise to the Lord for his mercy, and for the wonders which he does for the children of men!
The doors of brass are broken by his arm, and the bands of iron are cut in two.
Foolish men, because of their sins, and because of their wrongdoing, are troubled;
They are disgusted by all food, and they come near to the doors of death.
Then they send up their cry to the Lord in their sorrow, and he gives them salvation out of all their troubles.
He sent his word and made them well, and kept them safe from the underworld.
Let men give praise to the Lord for his mercy, and for the wonders which he does for the children of men!
Let them make offerings of praise, giving news of his works with cries of joy.
Those who go down to the sea in ships, who do business in the great waters;
They see the works of the Lord, and his wonders in the deep.
For at his word comes up the storm-wind, lifting high the waves.
The sailors go up to heaven, and down into the deep; their souls are wasted because of their trouble.
They are turned here and there, rolling like a man who is full of wine; and all their wisdom comes to nothing.
Then they send up their cry to the Lord in their sorrow, and he gives them salvation out of all their troubles.
He makes the storm into a calm, so that the waves are at peace.
Then they are glad, because the sea is quiet, and he takes them to the harbour of their desire.
Let men give praise to the Lord for his mercy, and for the wonders which he does for the children of men!
Let them give glory to him in the meeting of the people, and praise among the chiefs.
He makes rivers into waste places, and springs of water into a dry land;
He makes a fertile country into a salt waste, because of the sins of those who are living there.
He makes a waste land into a place of water, and a dry land into water-springs.
And there he gives the poor a resting-place, so that they may make themselves a town;
And put seed in the fields and make vine-gardens, to give them fruit.
He gives them his blessing so that they are increased greatly, and their cattle do not become less.
And when they are made low, and crushed by trouble and sorrow,
He puts an end to the pride of kings, and sends them wandering in the waste lands where there is no way.
But he puts the poor man on high from his troubles, and gives him families like a flock.
The upright see it and are glad: the mouth of the sinner is stopped.
Let the wise give thought to these things, and see the mercies of the Lord.A Song. A Psalm. Of David.
O God, my heart is fixed; I will make songs and melody, even with my glory.
Give out your sounds, O corded instruments: the dawn will be awaking with my song.
I will give you praise, O Lord, among the peoples; I will make melody to you among the nations.
For your mercy is higher than the heavens: and your unchanging faith than the clouds.
Be lifted up, O God, higher than the heavens; let your glory be over all the earth.
Let your right hand be stretched out for salvation, and give me an answer, so that your loved ones may be safe from danger.
This is the word of the holy God: I will be glad; I will make Shechem a heritage, measuring out the valley of Succoth.
Gilead is mine; Manasseh is mine; Ephraim is the strength of my head; Judah is my law-giver;
Moab is my washpot; on Edom is the resting-place of my shoe; over Philistia will I send out a glad cry.
Who will take me into the strong town? who will be my guide into Edom?
Have you not sent us away from you, O God? and you go not out with our armies.
Give us help in our trouble; for there is no help in man.
With God we will do great things; for by him will our haters be crushed underfoot.To the chief music-maker. Of David. A Psalm.
God of my praise, let my prayer be answered;
For the mouth of the sinner is open against me in deceit: his tongue has said false things against me.
Words of hate are round about me; they have made war against me without cause.
For my love they give me back hate; but I have given myself to prayer.
They have put on me evil for good; hate in exchange for my love.
Put an evil man over him; and let one be placed at his right hand to say evil of him.
When he is judged, let the decision go against him; and may his prayer become sin.
Let his life be short; let another take his position of authority.
Let his children have no father, and his wife be made a widow.
Let his children be wanderers, looking to others for their food; let them be sent away from the company of their friends.
Let his creditor take all his goods; and let others have the profit of his work.
Let no man have pity on him, or give help to his children when he is dead.
Let his seed be cut off; in the coming generation let their name go out of memory.
Let the Lord keep in mind the wrongdoing of his fathers; and may the sin of his mother have no forgiveness.
Let them be ever before the eyes of the Lord, so that the memory of them may be cut off from the earth.
Because he had no mercy, but was cruel to the low and the poor, designing the death of the broken-hearted.
As he took pleasure in cursing, so let it come on him; and as he had no delight in blessing, let it be far from him.
He put on cursing like a robe, and it has come into his body like water, and into his bones like oil.
Let it be to him as a robe which he puts on, let it be like a band which is round him at all times.
Let this be the reward given to my haters from the Lord, and to those who say evil of my soul.
But, O Lord God, give me your help, because of your name; take me out of danger, because your mercy is good.
For I am poor and in need, and my heart is wounded in me.
I am gone like the shade when it is stretched out: I am forced out of my place like a locust.
My knees are feeble for need of food; there is no fat on my bones.
As for me, they make sport of me; shaking their heads when they see me.
Give me help, O Lord my God; in your mercy be my saviour;
So that they may see that it is the work of your hand; that you, Lord, have done it.
They may give curses but you give blessing; when they come up against me, put them to shame; but let your servant be glad.
Let my haters be clothed with shame, covering themselves with shame as with a robe.
I will give the Lord great praise with my mouth; yes, I will give praise to him among all the people.
For he is ever at the right hand of the poor, to take him out of the hands of those who go after his soul.A Psalm. Of David.
The Lord said to my lord, Be seated at my right hand, till I put all those who are against you under your feet.
The Lord will send out the rod of your strength from Zion; be king over your haters.
Your people give themselves gladly in the day of your power; like the dew of the morning on the holy mountains is the army of your young men.
The Lord has made an oath, and will not take it back. You are a priest for ever, after the order of Melchizedek.
In the day of his wrath kings will be wounded by the Lord at your right hand.
He will be judge among the nations, the valleys will be full of dead bodies; the head over a great country will be wounded by him.
He will take of the stream by the way; so his head will be lifted up.Let the Lord be praised. I will give praise to the Lord with all my heart, among the upright, and in the meeting of the people.
The works of the Lord are great, searched out by all those who have delight in them.
His work is full of honour and glory; and his righteousness is unchanging for ever.
Certain for ever is the memory of his wonders: the Lord is full of pity and mercy.
He has given food to his worshippers; he will keep his agreement in mind for ever.
He has made clear to his people the power of his works, giving them the heritage of the nations.
The works of his hands are faith and righteousness; all his laws are unchanging.
They are fixed for ever and ever, they are done in faith and righteousness.
He has sent salvation to his people; he has given his word for ever: holy is his name and greatly to be feared.
The fear of the Lord is the best part of wisdom: all those who keep his laws are wise: his praise is eternal.Let the Lord be praised. Happy is the man who gives honour to the Lord, and has great delight in his laws.
His seed will be strong on the earth; blessings will be on the generation of the upright.
A store of wealth will be in his house, and his righteousness will be for ever.
For the upright there is a light shining in the dark; he is full of grace and pity.
All is well for the man who is kind and gives freely to others; he will make good his cause when he is judged.
He will not ever be moved; the memory of the upright will be living for ever.
He will have no fear of evil news; his heart is fixed, for his hope is in the Lord.
His heart is resting safely, he will have no fear, till he sees trouble come on his haters.
He has given with open hands to the poor; his righteousness is for ever; his horn will be lifted up with honour.
The sinner will see it with grief; he will be wasted away with envy; the desire of the evil-doers will come to nothing.Let the Lord be praised. O you servants of the Lord, give praise to the name of the Lord.
Let blessing be on the name of the Lord, from this time and for ever.
From the coming up of the sun to its going down, the Lord's name is to be praised.
The Lord is high over all nations, and his glory is higher than the heavens.
Who is like the Lord our God, who is seated on high,
Looking down on the heavens, and on the earth?
He takes the poor man out of the dust, lifting him up from his low position;
To give him a place among the rulers, even with the rulers of his people.
He gives the unfertile woman a family, making her a happy mother of children. Give praise to the Lord.When Israel came out of Egypt, the children of Jacob from a people whose language was strange to them;
Judah became his holy place, and Israel his kingdom.
The sea saw it, and went in flight; Jordan was turned back.
The mountains were jumping like goats, and the little hills like lambs.
What was wrong with you, O sea, that you went in flight? O Jordan, that you were turned back?
You mountains, why were you jumping like goats, and you little hills like lambs?
Be troubled, O earth, before the Lord, before the God of Jacob;
Who made the rock into a water-spring, and the hard stone into a fountain.Not to us, O Lord, not to us, but to your name let glory be given, because of your mercy and your unchanging faith.
Why may the nations say, Where is now their God?
But our God is in heaven: he has done whatever was pleasing to him.
Their images are silver and gold, the work of men's hands.
They have mouths, but no voice; they have eyes, but they see not;
They have ears, but no hearing; they have noses, but no sense of smell;
They have hands without feeling, and feet without power of walking; and no sound comes from their throat.
Those who make them are like them; and so is everyone who puts his faith in them.
O Israel, have faith in the Lord: he is their help and their breastplate.
O house of Aaron, have faith in the Lord: he is their help and their breastplate.
You worshippers of the Lord, have faith in the Lord: he is their help and their breastplate.
The Lord has kept us in mind and will give us his blessing; he will send blessings on the house of Israel and on the house of Aaron.
He will send blessings on the worshippers of the Lord, on the small and on the great.
May the Lord give you and your children still greater increase.
May you have the blessing of the Lord, who made heaven and earth.
The heavens are the Lord's; but the earth he has given to the children of men.
The dead do not give praise to the Lord; or those who go down to the underworld.
But we will give praise to the Lord now and for ever. Praise be to the Lord.I have given my love to the Lord, because he has given ear to the voice of my cry and my prayer.
He has let my request come before him, and I will make my prayer to him all my days.
The nets of death were round me, and the pains of the underworld had me in their grip; I was full of trouble and sorrow.
Then I made my prayer to the Lord, saying, O Lord, take my soul out of trouble.
The Lord is full of grace and righteousness; truly, he is a God of mercy.
The Lord keeps the simple; I was made low, and he was my saviour.
Come back to your rest, O my soul; for the Lord has given you your reward.
You have taken my soul from the power of death, keeping my eyes from weeping, and my feet from falling.
I will go before the Lord in the land of the living.
I still had faith, though I said, I am in great trouble;
Though I said in my fear, All men are false.
What may I give to the Lord for all the good things which he has done for me?
I will take the cup of salvation, and give praise to the name of the Lord.
I will make the offering of my oath to the Lord, even before all his people.
Dear in the eyes of the Lord is the death of his saints.
O Lord, truly I am your servant; I am your servant, the son of her who is your servant; by you have my cords been broken.
I will give an offering of praise to you, and make my prayer in the name of the Lord.
I will make the offerings of my oath, even before all his people;
In the Lord's house, even in Jerusalem. Praise be to the Lord.Let all the nations give praise to the Lord: let all the people give him praise.
For great is his mercy to us, and his faith is unchanging for ever. Praise be to the Lord.O give praise to the Lord, for he is good: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
Let Israel now say, that his mercy is unchanging for ever.
Let the house of Aaron now say, that his mercy is unchanging for ever.
Let all worshippers of the Lord now say, that his mercy is unchanging for ever.
I made my prayer to the Lord in my trouble: and the Lord gave me an answer, and put me in a wide place.
The Lord is on my side; I will have no fear: what is man able to do to me?
The Lord is my great helper: I will see my desire against my haters.
It is better to have faith in the Lord than to put one's hope in man.
It is better to have faith in the Lord than to put one's hope in rulers.
All the nations have come round me; but in the name of the Lord I will have them cut down.
They are round me, yes, they are all about me; but in the name of the Lord I will have them cut down.
They are round me like bees; but they are put out like a fire among thorns; for in the name of the Lord I will have them cut down.
I have been hard pushed by you, so that I might have a fall: but the Lord was my helper.
The Lord is my strength and my song; he has become my salvation.
The sound of joy and salvation is in the tents of the upright; the right hand of the Lord does works of power.
The right hand of the Lord is lifted up; the right hand of the Lord does works of power.
Life and not death will be my part, and I will give out the story of the works of the Lord.
The hand of Jah has been hard on me; but he has not given me up to death.
Let the doors of righteousness be open to me; I will go in and give praise to the Lord.
This is the door of the Lord's house; the workers of righteousness will go in through it.
I will give you praise, for you have given me an answer, and have become my salvation.
The stone which the builders put on one side has become the chief stone of the building.
This is the Lord's doing; it is a wonder in our eyes.
This is the day which the Lord has made; we will be full of joy and delight in it.
Send salvation now, O Lord; Lord, send us your blessing.
A blessing be on him who comes in the name of the Lord; we give you blessing from the house of the Lord.
The Lord is God, and he has given us light; let the holy dance be ordered with branches, even up to the horns of the altar.
You are my God, and I will give you praise; my God, and I will give honour to your name.
O give praise to the Lord, for he is good: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.A Song of the going up.
In my trouble my cry went up to the Lord, and he gave me an answer.
O Lord, be the saviour of my soul from false lips, and from the tongue of deceit.
What punishment will he give you? what more will he do to you, you false tongue?
Sharp arrows of the strong, and burning fire.
Sorrow is mine because I am strange in Meshech, and living in the tents of Kedar.
My soul has long been living with the haters of peace.
I am for peace: but when I say so, they are for war.A Song of the going up.
My eyes are lifted up to the hills: O where will my help come from?
Your help comes from the Lord, who made heaven and earth.
May he not let your foot be moved: no need of sleep has he who keeps you.
See, the eyes of Israel's keeper will not be shut in sleep.
The Lord is your keeper; the Lord is your shade on your right hand.
You will not be touched by the sun in the day, or by the moon at night.
The Lord will keep you safe from all evil; he will take care of your soul.
The Lord will keep watch over your going out and your coming in, from this time and for ever.A Song of the going up. Of David.
I was glad because they said to me, We will go into the house of the Lord.
At last our feet were inside your doors, O Jerusalem.
O Jerusalem, you are like a town which is well joined together;
To which the tribes went up, even the tribes of the Lord, for a witness to Israel, to give praise to the name of the Lord.
For there seats for the judges were placed, even the rulers' seats of the line of David.
O make prayers for the peace of Jerusalem; may they whose love is given to you do well.
May peace be inside your walls, and wealth in your noble houses.
Because of my brothers and friends, I will now say, Let peace be with you.
Because of the house of the Lord our God, I will be working for your good.A Song of the going up.
To you my eyes are lifted up, even to you whose seat is in the heavens.
See! as the eyes of servants are turned to the hands of their masters, and the eyes of a servant-girl to her owner, so our eyes are waiting for the Lord our God, till he has mercy on us.
Have mercy on us, O Lord, have mercy on us: for all men are looking down on us.
For long enough have men of pride made sport of our soul.A Song of the going up. Of David.
If it had not been the Lord who was on our side (let Israel now say);
If it had not been the Lord who was on our side, when men came up against us;
They would have made a meal of us while still living, in the heat of their wrath against us:
We would have been covered by the waters; the streams would have gone over our soul;
Yes, the waters of pride would have gone over our soul.
Praise be to the Lord, who has not let us be wounded by their teeth.
Our soul has gone free like a bird out of the net of those who would take her: the net is broken, and we are free.
Our help is in the name of the Lord, the maker of heaven and earth.A Song of the going up.
Those whose hope is in the Lord are like the mountain of Zion, which may not be moved, but keeps its place for ever.
As the mountains are round about Jerusalem, so the Lord is round about his people, from this time and for ever.
For the rod of sinners will not be resting on the heritage of the upright; so that the upright may not put out their hands to evil.
Do good, O Lord, to those who are good, and to those who are upright in heart.
But as for such as are turned out of the straight way, the Lord will take them away with the workers of evil. Let peace be on Israel.A Song of the going up.
When the Lord made a change in Zion's fate, we were like men in a dream.
Then our mouths were full of laughing, and our tongues gave a glad cry; they said among the nations, The Lord has done great things for them.
The Lord has done great things for us; because of which we are glad.
Let our fate be changed, O Lord, like the streams in the South.
Those who put in seed with weeping will get in the grain with cries of joy.
Though a man may go out weeping, taking his vessel of seed with him; he will come again in joy, with the corded stems of grain in his arms.A Song of the going up. Of Solomon.
If the Lord is not helping the builders, then the building of a house is to no purpose: if the Lord does not keep the town, the watchman keeps his watch for nothing.
It is of no use for you to get up early, and to go late to your rest, with the bread of sorrow for your food; for the Lord gives to his loved ones in sleep.
See, sons are a heritage from the Lord; the fruit of the body is his reward.
Like arrows in the hand of a man of war, are the children of the young.
Happy is the man who has a good store of them; he will not be put to shame, but his cause will be supported by them against his haters.A Song of the going up.
Happy is the worshipper of the Lord, who is walking in his ways.
You will have the fruit of the work of your hands: happy will you be, and all will be well for you.
Your wife will be like a fertile vine in the inmost parts of your house: your children will be like olive plants round your table.
See! this is the blessing of the worshipper of the Lord.
May the Lord send you blessing out of Zion: may you see the good of Jerusalem all the days of your life.
May you see your children's children. Peace be on Israel.A Song of the going up.
Great have been my troubles from the time when I was young (let Israel now say);
Great have been my troubles from the time when I was young, but my troubles have not overcome me.
The ploughmen were ploughing on my back; long were the wounds they made.
The Lord is true: the cords of the evil-doers are broken in two.
Let all the haters of Zion be shamed and turned back.
Let them be like the grass on the house-tops, which is dry before it comes to full growth.
He who gets in the grain has no use for it; and they do not make bands of it for the grain-stems.
And those who go by do not say, The blessing of the Lord be on you; we give you blessing in the name of the Lord.A Song of the going up.
Out of the deep have I sent up my cry to you, O Lord.
Lord, let my voice come before you: let your ears be awake to the voice of my prayer.
O Jah, if you took note of every sin, who would go free?
But there is forgiveness with you, so that you may be feared.
I am waiting for the Lord, my soul is waiting for him, and my hope is in his word.
My soul is watching for the Lord more than those who are watching for the morning; yes, more than the watchers for the morning.
O Israel, have hope in the Lord; for with the Lord is mercy and full salvation.
And he will make Israel free from all his sins.A Song of the going up. Of David.
Lord, there is no pride in my heart and my eyes are not lifted up; and I have not taken part in great undertakings, or in things over-hard for me.
See, I have made my soul calm and quiet, like a child on its mother's breast; my soul is like a child on its mother's breast.
O Israel, have hope in the Lord, from this time and for ever.A Song of the going up.
Lord, give thought to David, and to all his troubles;
How he made an oath to the Lord, and gave his word to the great God of Jacob, saying,
Truly, I will not come into my house, or go to my bed,
I will not give sleep to my eyes, or rest to my eyeballs,
Till I have got a place for the Lord, a resting-place for the great God of Jacob.
We had news of it at Ephrathah: we came to it in the fields of the wood.
Let us go into his tent; let us give worship at his feet.
Come back, O Lord, to your resting-place; you and the ark of your strength.
Let your priests be clothed with righteousness; and let your saints give cries of joy.
Because of your servant David, do not give up your king.
The Lord gave a true oath to David, which he will not take back, saying, I will give your kingdom to the fruit of your body.
If your children keep my word, and the teachings which I will give them, their children will be rulers of your kingdom for ever.
For the Lord's heart is on Zion, desiring it for his resting-place.
This is my rest for ever: here will I ever be; for this is my desire.
My blessing will be on her food; and her poor will be full of bread.
Her priests will be clothed with salvation; and her saints will give cries of joy.
There I will make the horn of David fertile: I have made ready a light for my king.
His haters will be clothed with shame; but I will make his crown shining.A Song of the going up. Of David.
See how good and how pleasing it is for brothers to be living together in harmony!
It is like oil of great price on the head, flowing down over the face, even Aaron's face: coming down to the edge of his robe;
Like the dew of Hermon, which comes down on the mountains of Zion: for there the Lord gave orders for the blessing, even life for ever.A Song of the going up.
Give praise to the Lord, all you servants of the Lord, who take your places in the house of the Lord by night.
Give praise to the Lord, lifting up your hands in his holy place.
May the Lord, who made heaven and earth, send you blessing out of Zion,Let the Lord be praised. O you servants of the Lord, give praise to the name of the Lord.
You who are in the house of the Lord, and in the open spaces of the house of our God,
Give praise to Jah, for he is good: make melody to his name, for it is pleasing.
For the Lord has taken Jacob for himself, and Israel for his property.
I know that the Lord is great, and that our Lord is greater than all other gods.
The Lord has done whatever was pleasing to him, in heaven, and on the earth, in the seas and in all the deep waters.
He makes the mists go up from the ends of the earth; he makes thunder-flames for the rain; he sends out the winds from his store-houses.
He put to death the first-fruits of Egypt, of man and of beast.
He sent signs and wonders among you, O Egypt, on Pharaoh, and on all his servants.
He overcame great nations, and put strong kings to death;
Sihon, king of the Amorites, and Og, king of Bashan, and all the kingdoms of Canaan;
And gave their land for a heritage, even for a heritage to Israel his people.
O Lord, your name is eternal; and the memory of you will have no end.
For the Lord will be judge of his people's cause; his feelings will be changed to his servants.
The images of the nations are silver and gold, the work of men's hands.
They have mouths, but no voice, they have eyes, but they do not see;
They have ears, but no hearing; and there is no breath in their mouths.
Those who make them are like them; and so is everyone who puts his hope in them.
Give praise to the Lord, O children of Israel: give praise to the Lord, O sons of Aaron:
Give praise to the Lord, O sons of Levi: let all the worshippers of the Lord give him praise.
Praise be to the Lord out of Zion, even to the Lord whose house is in Jerusalem, Let the Lord be praised.O give praise to the Lord, for he is good: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
O give praise to the God of gods: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
O give praise to the Lord of lords: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
To him who only does great wonders: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
To him who by wisdom made the heavens: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
To him by whom the earth was stretched out over the waters: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
To him who made great lights: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
The sun to have rule by day: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
The moon and the stars to have rule by night: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
To him who put to death the first-fruits of Egypt: for his mercy is unchanging for ever:
And took out Israel from among them: for his mercy is unchanging for ever:
With a strong hand and an outstretched arm: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
To him who made a way through the Red Sea: for his mercy is unchanging for ever:
And let Israel go through it: for his mercy is unchanging for ever:
By him Pharaoh and his army were overturned in the Red Sea: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
To him who took his people through the waste land: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
To him who overcame great kings: for his mercy is unchanging for ever:
And put noble kings to death: for his mercy is unchanging for ever:
Sihon, king of the Amorites: for his mercy is unchanging for ever:
And Og, king of Bashan: for his mercy is unchanging for ever:
And gave their land to his people for a heritage: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
Even a heritage for his servant Israel: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
Who kept us in mind when we were in trouble: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
And has taken us out of the hands of our haters: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
Who gives food to all flesh: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
O give praise to the God of heaven: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.By the rivers of Babylon we were seated, weeping at the memory of Zion,
Hanging our instruments of music on the trees by the waterside.
For there those who had taken us prisoners made request for a song; and those who had taken away all we had gave us orders to be glad, saying, Give us one of the songs of Zion.
How may we give the Lord's song in a strange land?
If I keep not your memory, O Jerusalem, let not my right hand keep the memory of its art.
If I let you go out of my thoughts, and if I do not put Jerusalem before my greatest joy, let my tongue be fixed to the roof of my mouth.
O Lord, keep in mind against the children of Edom the day of Jerusalem; how they said, Let it be uncovered, uncovered even to its base.
O daughter of Babylon, whose fate is destruction; happy is the man who does to you what you have done to us.
Happy is the man who takes your little ones, crushing them against the rocks.Of David.
I will give you praise with all my heart: I will make melody to you before the gods.
I will give worship before your holy Temple, praising your name for your mercy and for your unchanging faith: for you have made your word greater than all your name.
When my cry came to your ears you gave me an answer, and made me great with strength in my soul.
All the kings of the earth will give you praise, O Lord, when the words of your mouth come to their ears.
They will make songs about the ways of the Lord; for great is the glory of the Lord.
Though the Lord is high, he sees those who are low; and he has knowledge from far off of those who are lifted up.
Even when trouble is round me, you will give me life; your hand will be stretched out against the wrath of my haters, and your right hand will be my salvation.
The Lord will make all things complete for me: O Lord, your mercy is eternal; do not give up the works of your hands.To the chief music-maker. A Psalm. Of David.
O Lord, you have knowledge of me, searching out all my secrets.
You have knowledge when I am seated and when I get up, you see my thoughts from far away.
You keep watch over my steps and my sleep, and have knowledge of all my ways.
For there is not a word on my tongue which is not clear to you, O Lord.
I am shut in by you on every side, and you have put your hand on me.
Such knowledge is a wonder greater than my powers; it is so high that I may not come near it.
Where may I go from your spirit? how may I go in flight from you?
If I go up to heaven, you are there: or if I make my bed in the underworld, you are there.
If I take the wings of the morning, and go to the farthest parts of the sea;
Even there will I be guided by your hand, and your right hand will keep me.
If I say, Only let me be covered by the dark, and the light about me be night;
Even the dark is not dark to you; the night is as bright as the day: for dark and light are the same to you.
My flesh was made by you, and my parts joined together in my mother's body.
I will give you praise, for I am strangely and delicately formed; your works are great wonders, and of this my soul is fully conscious.
My frame was not unseen by you when I was made secretly, and strangely formed in the lowest parts of the earth.
Your eyes saw my unformed substance; in your book all my days were recorded, even those which were purposed before they had come into being.
How dear are your thoughts to me, O God! how great is the number of them!
If I made up their number, it would be more than the grains of sand; when I am awake, I am still with you.
If only you would put the sinners to death, O God; go far from me, you men of blood.
For they go against you with evil designs, and your haters make sport of your name.
Are not your haters hated by me, O Lord? are not those who are lifted up against you a cause of grief to me?
My hate for them is complete; my thoughts of them are as if they were making war on me.
O God, let the secrets of my heart be uncovered, and let my wandering thoughts be tested:
See if there is any way of sorrow in me, and be my guide in the eternal way.To the chief music-maker. A Psalm. Of David.
O Lord, take me out of the power of the evil man; keep me safe from the violent man:
For their hearts are full of evil designs; and they are ever making ready causes of war.
Their tongues are sharp like the tongue of a snake; the poison of snakes is under their lips. (Selah.)
O Lord, take me out of the hands of sinners; keep me safe from the violent man: for they are designing my downfall.
The men of pride have put secret cords for my feet; stretching nets in my way, so that they may take me with their tricks. (Selah.)
I have said to the Lord, You are my God: give ear, O Lord, to the voice of my prayer.
O Lord God, the strength of my salvation, you have been a cover over my head in the day of the fight.
O Lord, give not the wrongdoer his desire; give him no help in his evil designs, or he may be uplifted in pride. (Selah.)
As for those who come round me, let their heads be covered by the evil of their lips.
Let burning flames come down on them: let them be put into the fire, and into deep waters, so that they may not get up again.
Let not a man of evil tongue be safe on earth: let destruction overtake the violent man with blow on blow.
I am certain that the Lord will take care of the cause of the poor, and of the rights of those who are troubled.
Truly, the upright will give praise to your name: the holy will have a place in your house.A Psalm. Of David.
Lord, I have made my cry to you; come to me quickly; give ear to my voice, when it goes up to you.
Let my prayer be ordered before you like a sweet smell; and let the lifting up of my hands be like the evening offering.
O Lord, keep a watch over my mouth; keep the door of my lips.
Keep my heart from desiring any evil thing, or from taking part in the sins of the evil- doers with men who do wrong: and let me have no part in their good things.
Let the upright give me punishment; and let the god-fearing man put me in the right way; but I will not let the oil of sinners come on my head: when they do evil I will give myself to prayer.
When destruction comes to their judges by the side of the rock, they will give ear to my words, for they are sweet.
Our bones are broken up at the mouth of the underworld, as the earth is broken by the plough.
But my eyes are turned to you, O Lord God: my hope is in you; let not my soul be given up to death.
Keep me from the net which they have put down for me, and from the designs of the workers of evil.
Let the sinners be taken in the nets which they themselves have put down, while I go free.Maschil. Of David. A prayer when he was in the hole of the rock.
The sound of my cry went up to the Lord; with my voice I made my prayer for grace to the Lord.
I put all my sorrows before him; and made clear to him all my trouble.
When my spirit is overcome, your eyes are on my goings; nets have been secretly placed in the way in which I go.
Looking to my right side, I saw no man who was my friend: I had no safe place; no one had any care for my soul.
I have made my cry to you, O Lord; I have said, You are my safe place, and my heritage in the land of the living.
Give ear to my cry, for I am made very low: take me out of the hands of my haters, for they are stronger than I.
Take my soul out of prison, so that I may give praise to your name: the upright will give praise because of me; for you have given me a full reward.A Psalm. Of David.
Let my prayer come to you, O Lord; give ear to my requests for your grace; keep faith with me, and give me an answer in your righteousness;
Let not your servant come before you to be judged; for no man living is upright in your eyes.
The evil man has gone after my soul; my life is crushed down to the earth: he has put me in the dark, like those who have long been dead.
Because of this my spirit is overcome; and my heart is full of fear.
I keep in mind the early days of the past, giving thought to all your acts, even to the work of your hands.
My hands are stretched out to you: my soul is turned to you, like a land in need of water. (Selah.)
Be quick in answering me, O Lord, for the strength of my spirit is gone: let me see your face, so that I may not be like those who go down into the underworld.
Let the story of your mercy come to me in the morning, for my hope is in you: give me knowledge of the way in which I am to go; for my soul is lifted up to you.
O Lord, take me out of the hands of my haters; my soul is waiting for you.
Give me teaching so that I may do your pleasure; for you are my God: let your good Spirit be my guide into the land of righteousness.
Give me life, O Lord, because of your name; in your righteousness take my soul out of trouble.
And in your mercy put an end to my haters, and send destruction on all those who are against my soul; for I am your servant.A Psalm. Of David.
Praise be to the God of my strength, teaching my hands the use of the sword, and my fingers the art of fighting:
He is my strength, and my Rock; my high tower, and my saviour; my keeper and my hope: he gives me authority over my people.
Lord, what is man, that you keep him in mind? or the son of man that you take him into account?
Man is like a breath: his life is like a shade which is quickly gone.
Come down, O Lord, from your heavens: at your touch let the mountains give out smoke.
With your storm-flames send them in flight: send out your arrows for their destruction.
Put out your hand from on high; make me free, take me safely out of the great waters, and out of the hands of strange men;
In whose mouths are false words, and whose right hand is a right hand of deceit.
I will make a new song to you, O God; I will make melody to you on an instrument of ten cords.
It is God who gives salvation to kings; and who kept his servant David from the wounding sword.
Make me free, and take me out of the hands of strange men, in whose mouths are false words, and whose right hand is a right hand of deceit.
Our sons are like tall young plants; and our daughters like the shining stones of a king's house;
Our store-houses are full of all good things; and our sheep give birth to thousands and ten thousands in our fields.
Our oxen are well weighted down; our cows give birth safely; there is no going out, and there is no cry of sorrow in our open places.
Happy is the nation whose ways are so ordered: yes, happy is the nation whose God is the Lord.A Song of praise. Of David.
Let me give glory to you, O God, my King; and blessing to your name for ever and ever.
Every day will I give you blessing, praising your name for ever and ever.
Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised; his power may never be searched out.
One generation after another will give praise to your great acts, and make clear the operation of your strength.
My thoughts will be of the honour and glory of your rule, and of the wonder of your works.
Men will be talking of the power and fear of your acts; I will give word of your glory.
Their sayings will be full of the memory of all your mercy, and they will make songs of your righteousness.
The Lord is full of grace and pity; not quickly angry, but great in mercy.
The Lord is good to all men; and his mercies are over all his works.
Alltheworksofyourhandsgivepraisetoyou, OLord; andyoursaintsgiveyoublessing.
Their words will be of the glory of your kingdom, and their talk of your strength;
So that the sons of men may have knowledge of his acts of power, and of the great glory of his kingdom.
Your kingdom is an eternal kingdom, and your rule is through all generations.
The Lord is the support of all who are crushed, and the lifter up of all who are bent down.
The eyes of all men are waiting for you; and you give them their food in its time.
By the opening of your hand, every living thing has its desire in full measure.
The Lord is upright in all his ways, and kind in all his works.
The Lord is near all those who give honour to his name; even to all who give honour to him with true hearts.
To his worshippers, he will give their desire; their cry comes to his ears, and he gives them salvation.
The Lord will keep all his worshippers from danger; but he will send destruction on all sinners.
My mouth will give praise to the Lord; let all flesh be blessing his holy name for ever and ever.Let the Lord be praised. Give praise to the Lord, O my soul.
While I have breath I will give praise to the Lord: I will make melody to my God while I have my being.
Put not your faith in rulers, or in the son of man, in whom there is no salvation.
Man's breath goes out, he is turned back again to dust; in that day all his purposes come to an end.
Happy is the man who has the God of Jacob for his help, whose hope is in the Lord his God:
Who made heaven and earth, the sea, and all things in them; who keeps faith for ever:
Who gives their rights to those who are crushed down; and gives food to those who are in need of it: the Lord makes the prisoners free;
The Lord makes open the eyes of the blind; the Lord is the lifter up of those who are bent down; the Lord is a lover of the upright;
The Lord takes care of those who are in a strange land; he gives help to the widow and to the child who has no father; but he sends destruction on the way of sinners.
The Lord will be King for ever; your God, O Zion, will be King through all generations. Praise be to the Lord.Give praise to the Lord; for it is good to make melody to our God; praise is pleasing and beautiful.
The Lord is building up Jerusalem; he makes all the outlaws of Israel come together.
He makes the broken-hearted well, and puts oil on their wounds.
He sees the number of the stars; he gives them all their names.
Great is our Lord, and great his power; there is no limit to his wisdom.
The Lord gives help to the poor in spirit; but he sends sinners down in shame.
Make songs of praise to the Lord; make melody to our God with instruments of music.
By his hand the heaven is covered with clouds and rain is stored up for the earth; he makes the grass tall on the mountains.
He gives food to every beast, and to the young ravens in answer to their cry.
He has no delight in the strength of a horse; he takes no pleasure in the legs of a man.
The Lord takes pleasure in his worshippers, and in those whose hope is in his mercy.
Give praise to the Lord, O Jerusalem; give praise to your God, O Zion.
He has made strong the iron bands of your doors; he has sent blessings on your children inside your walls.
He gives peace in all your land, making your stores full of fat grain.
He sends out his orders to the earth; his word goes out quickly.
He gives snow like wool; he sends out ice-drops like dust.
He sends down ice like raindrops: water is made hard by his cold.
At the outgoing of his word, the ice is turned to water; when he sends out his wind, there is a flowing of waters.
He makes his word clear to Jacob, teaching Israel his laws and his decisions.
He has not done these things for any other nation: and as for his laws, they have no knowledge of them. Let the Lord be praised.Give praise to the Lord. Let the Lord be praised from the heavens: give him praise in the skies.
Give praise to him, all you his angels: give praise to him, all his armies.
Give praise to him, you sun and moon: give praise to him, all you stars of light.
Give praise to him, you highest heavens, and you waters which are over the heavens.
Let them give praise to the name of the Lord: for he gave the order, and they were made.
He has put them in their places for ever; he has given them their limits which may not be broken.
Give praise to the Lord from the earth, you great sea-beasts, and deep places:
Fire and rain of ice, snow and mists; storm-wind, doing his word:
Mountains and all hills; fruit-trees and all trees of the mountains:
Beasts and all cattle; insects and winged birds:
Kings of the earth, and all peoples; rulers and all judges of the earth:
Young men and virgins; old men and children:
Let them give glory to the name of the Lord: for his name only is to be praised: his kingdom is over the earth and the heaven.
He has put on high the horn of his people, for the praise of all his saints; even the children of Israel, a people which is near to him. Let the Lord be praised.Let the Lord be praised. Make a new song to the Lord, let his praise be in the meeting of his saints.
Let Israel have joy in his maker; let the children of Zion be glad in their King.
Let them give praise to his name in the dance: let them make melody to him with instruments of brass and corded instruments of music.
For the Lord has pleasure in his people: he gives the poor in spirit a crown of salvation.
Let the saints have joy and glory: let them give cries of joy on their beds.
Let the high praises of God be in their mouths, and a two-edged sword in their hands;
To give the nations the reward of their sins, and the peoples their punishment;
To put their kings in chains, and their rulers in bands of iron;
To give them the punishment which is in the holy writings: this honour is given to all his saints. Praise be to the Lord.Let the Lord be praised. Give praise to God in his holy place: give him praise in the heaven of his power.
Give him praise for his acts of power: give him praise in the measure of his great strength.
Give him praise with the sound of the horn: give him praise with corded instruments of music.
Give him praise with instruments of brass and in the dance: give him praise with horns and corded instruments.
Give him praise with the loud brass: give him praise with the high-sounding brass.
Let everything which has breath give praise to the Lord. Let the Lord be praised.Happy is the man who does not go in the company of sinners, or take his place in the way of evil-doers, or in the seat of those who do not give honour to the Lord.
But whose delight is in the law of the Lord, and whose mind is on his law day and night.
He will be like a tree planted by the rivers of water, which gives its fruit at the right time, whose leaves will ever be green; and he will do well in all his undertakings.
The evil-doers are not so; but are like the dust from the grain, which the wind takes away.
For this cause there will be no mercy for sinners when they are judged, and the evil- doers will have no place among the upright,
Because the Lord sees the way of the upright, but the end of the sinner is destruction.A Psalm. Of David. When he went in flight from Absalom his son.
Lord, how greatly are they increased who make attacks on me! in great numbers they come against me.
Unnumbered are those who say of my soul, There is no help for him in God. (Selah.)
But your strength, O Lord, is round me, you are my glory and the lifter up of my head.
I send up a cry to the Lord with my voice, and he gives me an answer from his holy hill. (Selah.)
I took my rest in sleep, and then again I was awake; for the Lord was my support.
I will have no fear, though ten thousand have come round me, putting themselves against me.
Come to me, Lord; keep me safe, O my God; for you have given all my haters blows on their face-bones; the teeth of the evil-doers have been broken by you.
Salvation comes from the Lord; your blessing is on your people. (Selah.)To the chief music-maker on corded instruments. A Psalm. Of David.
Give answer to my cry, O God of my righteousness; make me free from my troubles; have mercy on me, and give ear to my prayer.
O you sons of men, how long will you go on turning my glory into shame? how long will you give your love to foolish things, going after what is false? (Selah.)
See how the Lord has made great his mercy for me; the Lord will give ear to my cry.
Let there be fear in your hearts, and do no sin; have bitter feelings on your bed, but make no sound. (Selah.)
Give the offerings of righteousness, and put your faith in the Lord.
There are numbers who say, Who will do us any good? the light of his face has gone from us.
Lord, you have put joy in my heart, more than they have when their grain and their wine are increased.
I will take my rest on my bed in peace, because you only, Lord, keep me safe.To the chief music-maker on wind instruments. A Psalm. Of David.
Give ear to my words, O Lord; give thought to my heart-searchings.
Let the voice of my cry come to you, my King and my God; for to you will I make my prayer.
My voice will come to you in the morning, O Lord; in the morning will I send my prayer to you, and keep watch.
For you are not a God who takes pleasure in wrongdoing; there is no evil with you.
The sons of pride have no place before you; you are a hater of all workers of evil.
You will send destruction on those whose words are false; the cruel man and the man of deceit are hated by the Lord.
But as for me, I will come into your house, in the full measure of your mercy; and in your fear I will give worship, turning my eyes to your holy Temple.
Be my guide, O Lord, in the ways of your righteousness, because of those who are against me; make your way straight before my face.
For no faith may be put in their words; their inner part is nothing but evil; their throat is like an open place for the dead; smooth are the words of their tongues.
Send them to destruction, O Lord; let their evil designs be the cause of their fall; let them be forced out by all their sins; because they have gone against your authority.
But let all those who put their faith in you be glad with cries of joy at all times, and let all the lovers of your name be glad in you.
For you, Lord, will send a blessing on the upright man; your grace will be round him, and you will be his strength.To the chief music-maker on corded instruments, on the Sheminith. A Psalm. Of David.
O Lord, do not be bitter with me in your wrath; do not send punishment on me in the heat of your passion.
Have mercy on me, O Lord, for I am wasted away: make me well, for even my bones are troubled.
My soul is in bitter trouble; and you, O Lord, how long?
Come back, O Lord, make my soul free; O give me salvation because of your mercy.
For in death there is no memory of you; in the underworld who will give you praise?
The voice of my sorrow is a weariness to me; all the night I make my bed wet with weeping; it is watered by the drops flowing from my eyes.
My eyes are wasting away with trouble; they are becoming old because of all those who are against me.
Go from me, all you workers of evil; for the Lord has given ear to the voice of my weeping.
The Lord has given ear to my request; the Lord has let my prayer come before him.
Let all those who are against me be shamed and deeply troubled; let them be turned back and suddenly put to shame.Shiggaion of David; a song which he made to the Lord, about the words of Cush the Benjamite.
O Lord my God, I put my faith in you; take me out of the hands of him who is cruel to me, and make me free;
So that he may not come rushing on my soul like a lion, wounding it, while there is no one to be my saviour.
O Lord my God, if I have done this; if my hands have done any wrong;
If I have given back evil to him who did evil to me, or have taken anything from him who was against me without cause;
Let my hater go after my soul and take it; let my life be crushed to the earth, and my honour into the dust. (Selah.)
Come up, Lord, in your wrath; be lifted up against my haters; be awake, my God, give orders for the judging.
The meeting of the nations will be round you; take your seat, then, over them, on high.
The Lord will be judge of the peoples; give a decision for me, O Lord, because of my righteousness, and let my virtue have its reward.
O let the evil of the evil-doer come to an end, but give strength to the upright: for men's minds and hearts are tested by the God of righteousness.
God, who is the saviour of the upright in heart, is my breastplate.
God is the judge of the upright, and is angry with the evil-doers every day.
If a man is not turned from his evil, he will make his sword sharp; his bow is bent and ready.
He has made ready for him the instruments of death; he makes his arrows flames of fire.
That man is a worker of evil; the seed of wrongdoing has given birth to deceit.
He has made a hole deep in the earth, and is falling into the hole which he has made
His wrongdoing will come back to him, and his violent behaviour will come down on his head.
I will give praise to the Lord for his righteousness; I will make a song to the name of the Lord Most High.To the chief music-maker on the Gittith. A Psalm. Of David.
O Lord, our Lord, whose glory is higher than the heavens, how noble is your name in all the earth!
You have made clear your strength even out of the mouths of babies at the breast, because of those who are against you; so that you may put to shame the cruel and violent man.
When I see your heavens, the work of your fingers, the moon and the stars, which you have put in their places;
What is man, that you keep him in mind? the son of man, that you take him into account?
For you have made him only a little lower than the gods, crowning him with glory and honour.
You have made him ruler over the works of your hands; you have put all things under his feet;
All sheep and oxen, and all the beasts of the field;
The birds of the air and the fish of the sea, and whatever goes through the deep waters of the seas.
O Lord, our Lord, how noble is your name in all the earth!To the chief music-maker on Muthlabben. A Psalm. Of David.
I will give you praise, O Lord, with all my heart; I will make clear all the wonder of your works.
I will be glad and have delight in you: I will make a song of praise to your name, O Most High.
When my haters are turned back, they will be broken and overcome before you.
For you gave approval to my right and my cause; you were seated in your high place judging in righteousness.
You have said sharp words to the nations, you have sent destruction on the sinners, you have put an end to their name for ever and ever.
You have given their towns to destruction; the memory of them has gone; they have become waste for ever.
But the Lord is King for ever: he has made ready his high seat for judging.
And he will be the judge of the world in righteousness, giving true decisions for the peoples.
The Lord will be a high tower for those who are crushed down, a high tower in times of trouble;
And those who have knowledge of your name will put their faith in you; because you, Lord, have ever given your help to those who were waiting for you.
Make songs of praise to the Lord, whose house is in Zion: make his doings clear to the people.
When he makes search for blood, he has them in his memory: he is not without thought for the cry of the poor.
Have mercy on me, O Lord, and see how I am troubled by my haters; let me be lifted up from the doors of death;
So that I may make clear all your praise in the house of the daughter of Zion: I will be glad because of your salvation.
The nations have gone down into the hole which they made: in their secret net is their foot taken.
The Lord has given knowledge of himself through his judging: the evil-doer is taken in the net which his hands had made. (Higgaion. Selah.)
The sinners and all the nations who have no memory of God will be turned into the underworld.
For the poor will not be without help; the hopes of those in need will not be crushed for ever.
Up! O Lord; let not man overcome you: let the nations be judged before you.
Put them in fear, O Lord, so that the nations may see that they are only men. (Selah.)Why do you keep far away, O Lord? why are you not to be seen in times of trouble?
The evil-doer in his pride is cruel to the poor; let him be taken by the tricks of his invention.
For the evil-doer is lifted up because of the purpose of his heart, and he whose mind is fixed on wealth is turned away from the Lord, saying evil against him.
The evil-doer in his pride says, God will not make a search. All his thoughts are, There is no God.
His ways are ever fixed; your decisions are higher than he may see: as for his haters, they are as nothing to him.
He has said in his heart, I will not be moved: through all generations I will never be in trouble.
His mouth is full of cursing and deceit and false words: under his tongue are evil purposes and dark thoughts.
He is waiting in the dark places of the towns: in the secret places he puts to death those who have done no wrong: his eyes are secretly turned against the poor.
He keeps himself in a secret place like a lion in his hole, waiting to put his hands on the poor man, and pulling him into his net.
The upright are crushed and made low, and the feeble are overcome by his strong ones.
He says in his heart, God has no memory of me: his face is turned away; he will never see it.
Up! O Lord; let your hand be lifted: give thought to the poor.
Why has the evil-doer a low opinion of God, saying in his heart, You will not make search for it?
You have seen it; for your eyes are on sorrow and grief, to take it into your hand: the poor man puts his faith in you; you have been the helper of the child who has no father.
Let the arm of the sinner and the evil-doer be broken; go on searching for his sin till there is no more.
The Lord is King for ever and ever; the nations are gone from his land.
Lord, you have given ear to the prayer of the poor: you will make strong their hearts, you will give them a hearing:
To give decision for the child without a father and for the broken-hearted, so that the man of the earth may no longer be feared.For the chief music-maker. Of David.
In the Lord put I my faith; how will you say to my soul, Go in flight like a bird to the mountain?
See, the bows of the evil-doers are bent, they make ready their arrows on the cord, so that they may send them secretly against the upright in heart.
If the bases are broken down, what is the upright man to do?
The Lord is in his holy Temple, the Lord's seat is in heaven; his eyes are watching and testing the children of men.
The Lord puts the upright and the sinner to the test, but he has hate in his soul for the lover of violent acts.
On the evil-doer he will send down fire and flames, and a burning wind; with these will their cup be full.
For the Lord is upright; he is a lover of righteousness: the upright will see his face.For the chief music-maker on the Sheminith. A Psalm. Of David.
Send help, Lord, for mercy has come to an end; there is no more faith among the children of men.
Everyone says false words to his neighbour: their tongues are smooth in their talk, and their hearts are full of deceit.
The smooth lips and the tongue of pride will be cut off by the Lord.
They have said, With our tongues will we overcome; our lips are ours: who is lord over us?
Because of the crushing of the poor and the weeping of those in need, now will I come to his help, says the Lord; I will give him the salvation which he is desiring.
The words of the Lord are true words: like silver tested by fire and burned clean seven times.
You will keep them, O Lord, you will keep them safe from this generation for ever.
The sinners are walking on every side, and evil is honoured among the children of men.To the chief music-maker. A Psalm. Of David.
Will you for ever put me out of your memory, O Lord? will your face for ever be turned away from me?
How long is my soul to be in doubt, with sorrow in my heart all the day? how long will he who is against me be given power over me?
Let my voice come before you, and give me an answer, O Lord my God; let your light be shining on me, so that the sleep of death may not overtake me;
And he who is against me may not say, I have overcome him; and those who are troubling me may not be glad when I am moved.
But I have had faith in your mercy; my heart will be glad in your salvation.
I will make a song to the Lord, because he has given me my reward.To the chief music-maker. Of David.
The foolish man has said in his heart, God will not do anything. They are unclean, they have done evil works; there is not one who does good.
The Lord was looking down from heaven on the children of men, to see if there were any who had wisdom, searching after God.
They have all gone out of the way together; they are unclean, there is not one who does good, no, not one.
Have all the workers of evil no knowledge? they take my people for food as they would take bread; they make no prayer to the Lord.
Then were they in great fear: for God is in the generation of the upright.
You have put to shame the thoughts of the poor, but the Lord is his support.
May the salvation of Israel come out of Zion! when the fate of his people is changed by the Lord, Jacob will have joy and Israel will be glad.A Psalm. Of David.
Lord, who may have a resting-place in your tent, a living-place on your holy hill?
He who goes on his way uprightly, doing righteousness, and saying what is true in his heart;
Whose tongue is not false, who does no evil to his friend, and does not take away the good name of his neighbour;
Who gives honour to those who have the fear of the Lord, turning away from him who has not the Lord's approval. He who takes an oath against himself, and makes no change.
He who does not put out his money at interest, or for payment give false decisions against men who have done no wrong. He who does these things will never be moved.Michtam. Of David.
Keep me safe, O God: for in you I have put my faith.
O my soul, you have said to the Lord, You are my Lord: I have no good but you.
As for the saints who are in the earth, they are the noble in whom is all my delight.
Their sorrows will be increased who go after another god: I will not take drink offerings from their hands, or take their names on my lips.
The Lord is my heritage and the wine of my cup; you are the supporter of my right.
Fair are the places marked out for me; I have a noble heritage.
I will give praise to the Lord who has been my guide; knowledge comes to me from my thoughts in the night.
I have put the Lord before me at all times; because he is at my right hand, I will not be moved.
Because of this my heart is glad, and my glory is full of joy: while my flesh takes its rest in hope.
For you will not let my soul be prisoned in the underworld; you will not let your loved one see the place of death.
You will make clear to me the way of life; where you are joy is complete; in your right hand there are pleasures for ever and ever.A Prayer. Of David.
Let my cause come to your ears, O Lord, give attention to my cry; give ear to my prayer which goes not out from false lips.
Be my judge; for your eyes see what is right.
You have put my heart to the test, searching me in the night; you have put me to the test and seen no evil purpose in me; I will keep my mouth from sin.
As for the works of men, by the word of your lips I have kept myself from the ways of the violent.
I have kept my feet in your ways, my steps have not been turned away.
My cry has gone up to you, for you will give me an answer, O God: let your ear be turned to me, and give attention to my words.
Make clear the wonder of your mercy, O saviour of those who put their faith in your right hand, from those who come out against them.
Keep me as the light of your eyes, covering me with the shade of your wings,
From the evil-doers who are violent to me, and from those who are round me, desiring my death.
They are shut up in their fat: with their mouths they say words of pride.
They have made a circle round our steps: their eyes are fixed on us, forcing us down to the earth;
Like a lion desiring its food, and like a young lion waiting in secret places.
Up! Lord, come out against him, make him low, with your sword be my saviour from the evil-doer.
With your hand, O Lord, from men, even men of the world, whose heritage is in this life, and whom you make full with your secret wealth: they are full of children; after their death their offspring take the rest of their goods.
As for me, I will see your face in righteousness: when I am awake it will be joy enough for me to see your form.To the chief music-maker. Of the servant of the Lord, of David, who said the words of this song to the Lord on the day when the Lord made him free from the hand of all his haters, and from the hand of Saul; and he said,
I will give you my love, O Lord, my strength.
The Lord is my Rock, my walled town, and my saviour; my God, my Rock, in him will I put my faith; my breastplate, and the horn of my salvation, and my high tower.
I will send up my cry to the Lord, who is to be praised; so will I be made safe from those who are against me.
The cords of death were round me, and the seas of evil put me in fear.
The cords of hell were round me: the nets of death came on me.
In my trouble my voice went up to the Lord, and my cry to my God: my voice came to his hearing in his holy Temple, and my prayer came before him, even into his ears.
Then trouble and shock came on the earth; and the bases of the mountains were moved and shaking, because he was angry.
There went up a smoke from his nose, and a fire of destruction from his mouth: flames were lighted by it.
The heavens were bent, so that he might come down; and it was dark under his feet.
And he went in flight through the air, seated on a storm-cloud: going quickly on the wings of the wind.
He made the dark his secret place; his tent round him was the dark waters and thick clouds of the skies.
Before his shining light his dark clouds went past, raining ice and fire.
The Lord made thunder in the heavens, and the voice of the Highest was sounding out: a rain of ice and fire.
He sent out his arrows, driving them in all directions; by his flames of fire they were troubled.
Then the deep beds of the waters were seen, and the bases of the world were uncovered, because of your words of wrath, O Lord, because of the breath from your mouth.
He sent from on high, he took me, pulling me out of great waters.
He made me free from my strong hater, and from those who were against me, because they were stronger than I.
They came on me in the day of my trouble; but the Lord was my support.
He took me out into a wide place; he was my saviour because he had delight in me.
The Lord gives me the reward of my righteousness, because my hands are clean before him.
For I have kept the ways of the Lord; I have not been turned away in sin from my God.
For all his decisions were before me, and I did not put away his laws from me.
And I was upright before him, and I kept myself from sin.
Because of this the Lord has given me the reward of my righteousness, because my hands are clean in his eyes.
On him who has mercy you will have mercy; to the upright you will be upright;
He who is holy will see that you are holy; but to the man whose way is not straight you will be a hard judge.
For you are the saviour of those who are in trouble; but eyes full of pride will be made low.
You, O Lord, will be my light; by you, my God, the dark will be made bright for me.
By your help I have made a way through the wall which was shutting me in; by the help of my God I have gone over a wall.
AsforGod, hiswayiscompletelygood; thewordoftheLordistested; heisabreastplate for all those who put their faith in him.
For who is God but the Lord? or who is a Rock but our God?
God puts a strong band about me, guiding me in a straight way.
He makes my feet like roes' feet, and puts me on high places.
He makes my hands expert in war, so that a bow of brass is bent by my arms.
You have given me the breastplate of your salvation: your right hand has been my support, and your mercy has made me great.
You have made my steps wide under me, so that my feet are kept from slipping.
I go after my haters and overtake them; not turning back till they are all overcome.
I will give them wounds, so that they are not able to get up: they are stretched under my feet.
For I have been armed by you with strength for the fight: you have made low under me those who come out against me.
By you their backs are turned in flight, so that my haters are cut off.
They were crying out, but there was no one to come to their help: even to the Lord, but he gave them no answer.
Then they were crushed as small as dust before the wind; they were drained out like the waste of the streets.
You have made me free from the fightings of the people; you have made me the head of the nations: a people of whom I had no knowledge will be my servants.
From the time when my name comes to their ears they will be ruled by me: men of other countries will, with false hearts, put themselves under my authority.
They will be wasting away, they will come out of their secret places shaking with fear.
The Lord is living; praise be to my Rock, and let the God of my salvation be honoured.
It is God who sends punishment on my haters, and puts peoples under my rule.
He makes me free from my haters; I am lifted up over those who come up against me: you have made me free from the violent man.
Because of this I will give you praise, O Lord, among the nations, and will make a song of praise to your name.
Great salvation does he give to his king; he has mercy on the king of his selection, David, and on his seed for ever.To the chief music-maker. A Psalm. Of David.
The heavens are sounding the glory of God; the arch of the sky makes clear the work of his hands.
Day after day it sends out its word, and night after night it gives knowledge.
There are no words or language; their voice makes no sound.
Their line has gone out through all the earth, and their words to the end of the world. In them has he put a tent for the sun,
Who is like a newly married man coming from his bride-tent, and is glad like a strong runner starting on his way.
His going out is from the end of the heaven, and his circle to the ends of it; there is nothing which is not open to his heat.
The law of the Lord is good, giving new life to the soul: the witness of the Lord is certain, giving wisdom to the foolish.
The orders of the Lord are right, making glad the heart: the rule of the Lord is holy, giving light to the eyes.
The fear of the Lord is clean, and has no end; the decisions of the Lord are true and full of righteousness.
More to be desired are they than gold, even than much shining gold; sweeter than the dropping honey.
By them is your servant made conscious of danger, and in keeping them there is great reward.
Who has full knowledge of his errors? make me clean from secret evil.
Keep your servant back from sins of pride; let them not have rule over me: then will I be upright and free from great sin.
Let the words of my mouth and the thoughts of my heart be pleasing in your eyes, O Lord, my strength and my salvation.To the chief music-maker. A Psalm. Of David.
May the Lord give ear to you in the day of trouble; may you be placed on high by the name of the God of Jacob;
May he send you help from the holy place, and give you strength from Zion;
May he keep all your offerings in mind, and be pleased with the fat of your burned offerings; (Selah.)
May he give you your heart's desire, and put all your purposes into effect.
We will be glad in your salvation, and in the name of our God we will put up our flags: may the Lord give you all your requests.
Now am I certain that the Lord gives salvation to his king; he will give him an answer from his holy heaven with the strength of salvation in his right hand.
Some put their faith in carriages and some in horses; but we will be strong in the name of the Lord our God.
They are bent down and made low; but we have been lifted up.
Come to our help, Lord: let the king give ear to our cry.To the chief music-maker. A Psalm. Of David.
The king will be glad in your strength, O Lord; how great will be his delight in your salvation!
You have given him his heart's desire, and have not kept back the request of his lips. (Selah.)
For you go before him with the blessings of good things: you put a crown of fair gold on his head.
He made request to you for life, and you gave it to him, long life for ever and ever.
His glory is great in your salvation: honour and authority have you put on him.
For you have made him a blessing for ever: you have given him joy in the light of your face.
For the king has faith in the Lord, and through the mercy of the Most High he will not be moved.
Your hand will make a search for all your haters; your right hand will be hard on all those who are against you.
You will make them like a flaming oven before you; the Lord in his wrath will put an end to them, and they will be burned up in the fire.
Their fruit will be cut off from the earth, and their seed from among the children of men.
For their thoughts were bitter against you: they had an evil design in their minds, which they were not able to put into effect.
Their backs will be turned when you make ready the cords of your bow against their faces.
Be lifted up, O Lord, in your strength; so will we make songs in praise of your power.To the chief music-maker on Aijeleth-hash-shahar. A Psalm. Of David.
My God, my God, why are you turned away from me? why are you so far from helping me, and from the words of my crying?
O my God, I make my cry in the day, and you give no answer; and in the night, and have no rest.
But you are holy, O you who are seated among the praises of Israel.
Our fathers had faith in you: they had faith and you were their saviour.
They sent up their cry to you and were made free: they put their faith in you and were not put to shame.
But I am a worm and not a man; cursed by men, and looked down on by the people.
I am laughed at by all those who see me: pushing out their lips and shaking their heads they say,
He put his faith in the Lord; let the Lord be his saviour now: let the Lord be his saviour, because he had delight in him.
But it was you who took care of me from the day of my birth: you gave me faith even from my mother's breasts.
I was in your hands even before my birth; you are my God from the time when I was in my mother's body.
Be not far from me, for trouble is near; there is no one to give help.
A great herd of oxen is round me: I am shut in by the strong oxen of Bashan.
I saw their mouths wide open, like lions crying after food.
I am flowing away like water, and all my bones are out of place: my heart is like wax, it has become soft in my body.
My throat is dry like a broken vessel; my tongue is fixed to the roof of my mouth, and the dust of death is on my lips.
Dogs have come round me: I am shut in by the band of evil-doers; they made wounds in my hands and feet.
I am able to see all my bones; their looks are fixed on me:
They make a division of my robes among them, by the decision of chance they take my clothing.
Do not be far from me, O Lord: O my strength, come quickly to my help.
Make my soul safe from the sword, my life from the power of the dog.
Be my saviour from the lion's mouth; let me go free from the horns of the cruel oxen.
I will give the knowledge of your name to my brothers: I will give you praise among the people.
You who have fear of the Lord, give him praise; all you seed of Jacob, give him glory; go in fear of him, all you seed of Israel.
For he has not been unmoved by the pain of him who is troubled; or kept his face covered from him; but he has given an answer to his cry.
My praise will be of you in the great meeting: I will make my offerings before his worshippers.
The poor will have a feast of good things: those who make search for the Lord will give him praise: your heart will have life for ever.
All the ends of the earth will keep it in mind and be turned to the Lord: all the families of the nations will give him worship.
For the kingdom is the Lord's; he is the ruler among the nations.
All the fat ones of the earth will give him worship; all those who go down to the dust will make themselves low before him, even he who has not enough for the life of his soul.
A seed will be his servant; the doings of the Lord will be made clear to the generation which comes after.
They will come and make his righteousness clear to a people of the future because he has done this.A Psalm. Of David.
The Lord takes care of me as his sheep; I will not be without any good thing.
He makes a resting-place for me in the green fields: he is my guide by the quiet waters.
He gives new life to my soul: he is my guide in the ways of righteousness because of his name.
Yes, though I go through the valley of deep shade, I will have no fear of evil; for you are with me, your rod and your support are my comfort.
You make ready a table for me in front of my haters: you put oil on my head; my cup is overflowing.
Truly, blessing and mercy will be with me all the days of my life; and I will have a place in the house of the Lord all my days.A Psalm. Of David.
The earth is the Lord's, with all its wealth; the world and all the people living in it.
For by him it was based on the seas, and made strong on the deep rivers.
Who may go up into the hill of the Lord? and who may come into his holy place?
He who has clean hands and a true heart; whose desire has not gone out to foolish things, who has not taken a false oath.
He will have blessing from the Lord, and righteousness from the God of his salvation.
This is the generation of those whose hearts are turned to you, even to your face, O God of Jacob. (Selah.)
Let your heads be lifted up, O doors; be lifted up, O you eternal doors: that the King of glory may come in.
Who is the King of glory? The Lord of strength and power, the Lord strong in war.
Let your heads be lifted up, O doors; let them be lifted up, O you eternal doors: that the King of glory may come in.
Who is the King of glory? The Lord of armies, he is the King of glory. (Selah.)Of David.
To you, O Lord, my soul is lifted up.
OmyGod, Ihaveputmyfaithinyou, letmenotbeshamed; letnotmyhatersbeglorying over me.
Let no servant of yours be put to shame; may those be shamed who are false without cause.
Make your steps clear to me, O Lord; give me knowledge of your ways.
Be my guide and teacher in the true way; for you are the God of my salvation; I am waiting for your word all the day.
O Lord, keep in mind your pity and your mercies; for they have been from the earliest times.
Do not keep in mind my sins when I was young, or my wrongdoing: let your memory of me be full of mercy, O Lord, because of your righteousness.
Good and upright is the Lord: so he will be the teacher of sinners in the way.
He will be an upright guide to the poor in spirit: he will make his way clear to them.
All the ways of the Lord are mercy and good faith for those who keep his agreement and his witness.
Because of your name, O Lord, let me have forgiveness for my sin, which is very great.
If a man has the fear of the Lord, the Lord will be his teacher in the way of his pleasure.
His soul will be full of good things, and his seed will have the earth for its heritage.
The secret of the Lord is with those in whose hearts is the fear of him; he will make his agreement clear to them.
My eyes are turned to the Lord at all times; for he will take my feet out of the net.
Be turned to me, and have mercy on me; for I am troubled and have no helper.
The troubles of my heart are increased: O take me out of my sorrows.
Give thought to my grief and my pain; and take away all my sins.
See how those who are against me are increased, for bitter is their hate of me.
O keep my soul, and take me out of danger: let me not be shamed, for I have put my faith in you.
For my clean and upright ways keep me safe, because my hope is in you.
Give Israel salvation, O God, out of all his troubles.Of David.
O Lord, be my judge, for my behaviour has been upright: I have put my faith in the Lord, I am not in danger of slipping.
Put me in the scales, O Lord, so that I may be tested; let the fire make clean my thoughts and my heart.
For your mercy is before my eyes; and I have gone in the way of your good faith.
I have not taken my seat with foolish persons, and I do not go with false men.
I have been a hater of the band of wrongdoers, and I will not be seated among sinners.
I will make my hands clean from sin; so will I go round your altar, O Lord;
That I may give out the voice of praise, and make public all the wonders which you have done.
Lord, your house has been dear to me, and the resting-place of your glory.
Let not my soul be numbered among sinners, or my life among men of blood;
In whose hands are evil designs, and whose right hands take money for judging falsely.
But as for me, I will go on in my upright ways: be my saviour, and have mercy on me.
I have a safe resting-place for my feet; I will give praise to the Lord in the meetings of the people.Of David.
The Lord is my light and my salvation; who is then a cause of fear to me? the Lord is the strength of my life; who is a danger to me?
When evil-doers, even my haters, came on me to put an end to me, they were broken and put to shame.
Even if an army came against me with its tents, my heart would have no fear: if war was made on me, my faith would not be moved.
One prayer have I made to the Lord, and this is my heart's desire; that I may have a place in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, looking on his glory, and getting wisdom in his Temple.
For in the time of trouble he will keep me safe in his tent: in the secret place of his tent he will keep me from men's eyes; high on a rock he will put me.
And now my head will be lifted up higher than my haters who are round me: because of this I will make offerings of joy in his tent; I will make a song, truly I will make a song of praise to the Lord.
O Lord, let the voice of my cry come to your ears: have mercy on me, and give me an answer.
When you said, Make search for my face, my heart said to you, For your face will I make my search.
Let not your face be covered from me; do not put away your servant in wrath; you have been my help: do not give me up or take your support from me, O God of my salvation.
When my father and my mother are turned away from me, then the Lord will be my support.
Make your way clear to me, O Lord, guiding me by the right way, because of my haters.
Do not give me into their hands, because false witnesses have come out against me, and men breathing destruction.
I had almost given up my hope of seeing the blessing of the Lord in the land of the living.
Let your hope be in the Lord: take heart and be strong; yes, let your hope be in the Lord.Of David.
My cry goes up to you, O Lord, my Rock; do not keep back your answer from me, so that I may not become like those who go down into the underworld.
Give ear to the voice of my prayer, when I am crying to you, when my hands are lifted up to your holy place.
Do not take me away with the sinners and the workers of evil, who say words of peace to their neighbours, but evil is in their hearts.
Give them the right reward of their acts, and of their evil doings: give them punishment for the works of their hands, let them have their full reward.
Because they have no respect for the works of the Lord, or for the things which his hands have made, they will be broken down and not lifted up by him.
May the Lord be praised, because he has given ear to the voice of my prayer.
The Lord is my strength and my breastplate, my heart had faith in him and I am helped; for this cause my heart is full of rapture, and I will give him praise in my song.
The Lord is their strength, and a strong place of salvation for his king.
Be a saviour to your people, and send a blessing on your heritage: be their guide, and let them be lifted up for ever.A Psalm. Of David.
Give to the Lord, you sons of the gods, give to the Lord glory and strength.
Give to the Lord the full glory of his name; give him worship in holy robes.
The voice of the Lord is on the waters: the God of glory is thundering, the Lord is on the great waters.
The voice of the Lord is full of power; the voice of the Lord has a noble sound.
By the voice of the Lord are the cedar-trees broken, even the cedars of Lebanon are broken by the Lord.
He makes them go jumping about like a young ox; Lebanon and Sirion like a young mountain ox.
At the voice of the Lord flames of fire are seen.
At the voice of the Lord there is a shaking in the waste land, even a shaking in the waste land of Kadesh.
At the voice of the Lord the roes give birth, the leaves are taken from the trees: in his Temple everything says, Glory.
The Lord had his seat as king when the waters came on the earth; the Lord is seated as king for ever.
The Lord will give strength to his people; the Lord will give his people the blessing of peace.A Psalm. A Song at the blessing of the House. Of David.
I will give you praise and honour, O Lord, because through you I have been lifted up; you have not given my haters cause to be glad over me.
O Lord my God, I sent up my cry to you, and you have made me well.
O Lord, you have made my soul come again from the underworld: you have given me life and kept me from going down among the dead.
Make songs to the Lord, O you saints of his, and give praise to his holy name.
For his wrath is only for a minute; in his grace there is life; weeping may be for a night, but joy comes in the morning.
When things went well for me I said, I will never be moved.
Lord, by your grace you have kept my mountain strong: when your face was turned from me I was troubled.
My voice went up to you, O Lord; I made my prayer to the Lord.
What profit is there in my blood if I go down into the underworld? will the dust give you praise, or be a witness to your help?
Give ear to me, O Lord, and have mercy on me: Lord, be my helper.
By you my sorrow is turned into dancing; you have taken away my clothing of grief, and given me robes of joy;
So that my glory may make songs of praise to you and not be quiet. O Lord my God, I will give you praise for ever.To the chief music-maker. A Psalm. Of David.
In you, O Lord, have I put my hope; let me never be shamed; keep me safe in your righteousness.
Let your ear be turned to me; take me quickly out of danger; be my strong Rock, my place of strength where I may be safe.
For you are my Rock and my strong tower; go in front of me and be my guide, because of your name.
Take me out of the net which they have put ready for me secretly; for you are my strength.
Into your hands I give my spirit; you are my saviour, O Lord God for ever true.
I am full of hate for those who go after false gods; but my hope is in the Lord.
I will be glad and have delight in your mercy; because you have seen my trouble; you have had pity on my soul in its sorrows;
And you have not given me into the hand of my hater; you have put my feet in a wide place.
Have mercy on me, O Lord, for I am in trouble; my eyes are wasted with grief, I am wasted in soul and body.
Mylifegoesoninsorrow, andmyyearsinweeping; mystrengthisalmostgonebecause of my sin, and my bones are wasted away.
Because of all those who are against me, I have become a word of shame to my neighbours; a cause of shaking the head and a fear to my friends: those who saw me in the street went in flight from me.
I have gone from men's minds and memory like a dead man; I am like a broken vessel.
False statements against me have come to my ears; fear was on every side: they were talking together against me, designing to take away my life.
But I had faith in you, O Lord; I said, You are my God.
The chances of my life are in your hand; take me out of the hands of my haters, and of those who go after me.
Let your servant see the light of your face; in your mercy be my saviour.
Let me not be shamed, O Lord, for I have made my prayer to you; let the sinners be shamed, and let their mouths be shut in the underworld.
Let the false lips be shut, which say evil against the upright, looking down on him in their pride.
O how great is your grace, which you have put in store for your worshippers, and which you have made clear to those who had faith in you, before the sons of men!
You will keep them safe in your house from the designs of man; in the secret of your tent will you keep them from angry tongues.
May the Lord be praised, because he has made clear to me the wonder of his grace in a strong town.
And as for me, I said in my fear, I am cut off from before your eyes; but you gave ear to the voice of my prayer, when my cry went up to you.
O have love for the Lord, all you his saints; for the Lord keeps safe from danger all those who are true to him, and gives the workers of pride their right reward.
Put away fear and let your heart be strong, all you whose hope is in the Lord.Of David. Maschil.
Happy is he who has forgiveness for his wrongdoing, and whose sin is covered.
Happy is the man in whom the Lord sees no evil, and in whose spirit there is no deceit.
When I kept my mouth shut, my bones were wasted, because of my crying all through the day.
For the weight of your hand was on me day and night; my body became dry like the earth in summer. (Selah.)
I made my wrongdoing clear to you, and did not keep back my sin. I said, I will put it all before the Lord; and you took away my wrongdoing and my sin. (Selah.)
For this cause let every saint make his prayer to you at a time when you are near: then the overflowing of the great waters will not overtake him.
You are my safe and secret place; you will keep me from trouble; you will put songs of salvation on the lips of those who are round me. (Selah.)
I will give you knowledge, teaching you the way to go; my eye will be your guide.
Do not be like the horse or the ass, without sense; ...
The sinner will be full of trouble; but mercy will be round the man who has faith in the Lord.
Be glad in the Lord with joy, you upright men; give cries of joy, all you whose hearts are true.Be glad in the Lord, O doers of righteousness; for praise is beautiful for the upright.
Give praise to the Lord on the corded instrument; make melody to him with instruments of music.
Make a new song to him; playing expertly with a loud noise.
For the word of the Lord is upright, and all his works are certain.
His delight is in righteousness and wisdom; the earth is full of the mercy of the Lord.
By the word of the Lord were the heavens made; and all the army of heaven by the breath of his mouth.
He makes the waters of the sea come together in a mass; he keeps the deep seas in store-houses.
Let the earth be full of the fear of the Lord; let all the people of the world be in holy fear of him.
For he gave the word, and it was done; by his order it was fixed for ever.
The Lord undoes the designs of the nations; he makes the thoughts of the peoples without effect.
TheLord'spurposeiseternal, thedesignsofhisheartgoonthroughallthegenerations of man.
Happy is the nation whose God is the Lord; and the people whom he has taken for his heritage.
The Lord is looking down from heaven; he sees all the sons of men;
From his house he keeps watch on all who are living on the earth;
He makes all their hearts; their works are clear to him.
A king's salvation is not in the power of his army; a strong man does not get free by his great strength.
A horse is a false hope; his great power will not make any man free from danger.
See, the eye of the Lord is on those in whose hearts is the fear of him, on those whose hope is in his mercy;
To keep their souls from death; and to keep them living in time of need.
Our souls are waiting for the Lord; he is our help and our salvation.
For in him our hearts have joy; in his holy name is our hope.
Let your mercy be on us, O Lord, as we are waiting for you.Of David. When he made a change in his behaviour before Abimelech, who sent him away, and he went.
I will be blessing the Lord at all times; his praise will be ever in my mouth.
My soul will say great things of the Lord: the poor in spirit will have knowledge of it and be glad.
O give praise to the Lord with me; let us be witnesses together of his great name.
I was searching for the Lord, and he gave ear to my voice, and made me free from all my fears.
Let your eyes be turned to him and you will have light, and your faces will not be shamed.
This poor man's cry came before the Lord, and he gave him salvation from all his troubles.
The angel of the Lord is ever watching over those who have fear of him, to keep them safe.
By experience you will see that the Lord is good; happy is the man who has faith in him.
Keep yourselves in the fear of the Lord, all you his saints; for those who do so will have no need of anything.
The young lions are in need and have no food; but those who are looking to the Lord will have every good thing.
Come, children, give attention to me; I will be your teacher in the fear of the Lord.
What man has a love of life, and a desire that his days may be increased so that he may see good?
Keep your tongue from evil, and your lips from words of deceit.
Be turned from evil, and do good; make a search for peace, desiring it with all your heart.
The eyes of the Lord are on the upright, and his ears are open to their cry.
The face of the Lord is against those who do evil, to take away the memory of them from the earth.
The cry of the upright comes before the Lord, and he takes them out of all their troubles.
The Lord is near the broken-hearted; he is the saviour of those whose spirits are crushed down.
Great are the troubles of the upright: but the Lord takes him safely out of them all.
He keeps all his bones: not one of them is broken.
Evil will put an end to the sinner, and those who are haters of righteousness will come to destruction.
The Lord will be the saviour of the souls of his servants, and no one who has faith in him will be put to shame.Of David.
O Lord, be on my side against those who are judging me; be at war with those who make war against me.
Be a breastplate to me, and give me your help.
Take up your spear and keep back my attackers; say to my soul, I am your salvation.
Let them be overcome and put to shame who make attempts to take my soul; let those who would do me damage be turned back and made foolish.
Let them be like dust from the grain before the wind; let the angel of the Lord send them in flight.
Let their way be dark and full of danger; let them be troubled by the angel of the Lord.
For without cause they have put a net ready for me secretly, in which to take my soul.
Let destruction come on them without their knowledge; let them be taken themselves in their secret nets, falling into the same destruction.
And my soul will have joy in the Lord; it will be glad in his salvation.
All my bones will say, Lord, who is like you? The saviour of the poor man from the hands of the strong, of him who is poor and in need from him who takes his goods.
False witnesses got up: they put questions to me about crimes of which I had no knowledge.
They gave me back evil for good, troubling my soul.
But as for me, when they were ill I put on the clothing of sorrow: I went without food and was sad, and my prayer came back again to my heart.
My behaviour was as if it had been my friend or my brother: I was bent low in grief like one whose mother is dead.
But they took pleasure in my trouble, and came together, yes, low persons came together against me without my knowledge; they never came to an end of wounding me.
Like men of deceit they put me to shame; the voice of their wrath was loud against me.
Lord, how long will you be looking on? take my soul from their destruction, my life from the lions.
I will give you praise in the great meeting; I will give you honour among a strong people.
Do not let my haters be glad over me falsely; let not those who are against me without cause make sport of me.
Fortheydonotsaywordsofpeace; intheirdeceittheyaredesigningevilthingsagainst the quiet ones in the land.
Their mouths were open wide against me, and they said, Aha, aha, our eyes have seen it.
You have seen this, O Lord; be not unmoved: O Lord, be not far from me.
Be awake, O Lord, be moved to take up my cause, my God and my Lord.
Be my judge, O Lord my God, in your righteousness; do not let them be glad over me.
Let them not say in their hearts, So we will have it: let them not say, We have put an end to him.
Let all those who take pleasure in my troubles be shamed and come to nothing: let those who are lifted up against me be covered with shame and have no honour.
Let those who are on my side give cries of joy; let them ever say, The Lord be praised, for he has pleasure in the peace of his servant.
And my tongue will be talking of your righteousness and of your praise all the day.To the chief music-maker. Of the servant of the Lord. Of David.
The sin of the evil-doer says in his heart, There is no fear of the Lord before his eyes.
For he takes comfort in the thought that his sin will not be uncovered and hated.
In the words of his mouth are evil and deceit; he has given up being wise and doing good.
He gives thought to evil on his bed; he takes a way which is not good; he is not a hater of evil.
Your mercy, O Lord, is in the heavens, and your strong purpose is as high as the clouds.
Your righteousness is like the mountains of God; your judging is like the great deep; O Lord, you give life to man and beast.
How good is your loving mercy, O God! the children of men take cover under the shade of your wings.
The delights of your house will be showered on them; you will give them drink from the river of your pleasures.
For with you is the fountain of life: in your light we will see light.
O let there be no end to your loving mercy to those who have knowledge of you, or of your righteousness to the upright in heart.
Let not the foot of pride come against me, or the hand of the evil-doers put me out of my place.
There the workers of evil have come down: they have been made low, and will not be lifted up.Of David.
Do not be angry because of the wrongdoers, or have envy of the workers of evil.
For they will quickly be cut down like grass, and become dry like the green plants.
Have faith in the Lord, and do good; be at rest in the land, and go after righteousness.
So will your delight be in the Lord, and he will give you your heart's desires.
Put your life in the hands of the Lord; have faith in him and he will do it.
And he will make your righteousness be seen like the light, and your cause like the shining of the sun.
Take your rest in the Lord, waiting quietly for him; do not be angry because of the man who does well in his evil ways, and gives effect to his bad designs.
Put an end to your wrath and be no longer bitter; do not give way to angry feeling which is a cause of sin.
For the evil-doers will be cut off: but those who have faith in the Lord will have the earth for their heritage.
For in a short time the evil-doer will be gone: you will go searching for his place, and it will not be there.
But the gentle will have the earth for their heritage; they will take their delight in peace without measure.
The sinner has evil designs against the upright, lifting up the voice of wrath against him.
He will be laughed at by the Lord, who sees that his day is coming.
The evil-doers have taken out their swords, their bows are bent; for crushing the poor, and to put to death those who are upright in their ways.
But their swords will be turned into their hearts, and their bows will be broken.
The little which the good man has is better than the wealth of evil-doers.
For the arms of the evil-doers will be broken: but the Lord is the support of the good.
The days of the upright are numbered by the Lord, and their heritage will be for ever.
They will not be shamed in the evil time, and in the days when all are in need of food they will have enough.
But the wrongdoers will come to destruction, and the haters of the Lord will be like the fat of lambs, they will be burned up; they will go up in smoke, and never again be seen.
The sinner takes money and does not give it back; but the upright man has mercy, and gives to others.
Those who have his blessing will have the earth for their heritage; but those who are cursed by him will be cut off.
The steps of a good man are ordered by the Lord, and he takes delight in his way.
Even if he has a fall he will not be without help: for the hand of the Lord is supporting him.
I have been young, and now am old, but I have not seen the good man without help, or his children looking for bread.
All the day he is ready to have mercy and to give; his children are a blessing.
Be turned from evil, and do good; and your place will be for ever.
For the Lord is a lover of righteousness, and takes care of his saints; they will be kept safe for ever; but the seed of the evil-doers will be cut off.
The upright will have the earth for their heritage, and will go on living there for ever.
The mouth of the good man says words of wisdom; the talk of his tongue is of righteousness.
The law of his God is in his heart; he will never make a false step.
The sinners are watching the upright man, desiring to put him to death.
The Lord will not give him into their hands, or be against him when he is judged.
Be waiting for the Lord, and keep his way; and you will be lifted up, and have the land for your heritage: when the evil-doers are cut off, you will see it.
I have seen the evil-doer in great power, covering the earth like a great tree.
But he came to an end, and there was no sign of him; I made a search for him and he was not there.
Give attention to the good man, and take note of the upright; because the end of that man is peace.
But as for the sinners, they will be cut off together; the end of the wrongdoers is destruction.
But the Lord is the saviour of the upright: he is their strength in the time of trouble.
And the Lord will be their help, and keep them safe: he will take them out of the hands of the evil-doers, and be their saviour, because they had faith in him.A Psalm. Of David. To keep in memory.
O Lord, be not bitter with me in your wrath; let not your hand be on me in the heat of your passion.
For your arrows have gone into my flesh, and I am crushed under the weight of your hand.
My flesh is wasted because of your wrath; and there is no peace in my bones because of my sin.
For my crimes have gone over my head; they are like a great weight which is more than my strength.
My wounds are poisoned and evil-smelling, because of my foolish behaviour.
I am troubled, I am made low; I go weeping all the day.
For my body is full of burning; all my flesh is unhealthy.
I am feeble and crushed down; I gave a cry like a lion because of the grief in my heart.
Lord, all my desire is before you; my sorrow is not kept secret from you.
My heart goes out in pain, my strength is wasting away; as for the light of my eyes, it is gone from me.
My lovers and my friends keep away from my disease; my relations keep far away.
Those who have a desire to take my life put nets for me; those who are designing my destruction say evil things against me, all the day their minds are full of deceit.
But I kept my ears shut like a man without hearing; like a man without a voice, never opening his mouth.
So I was like a man whose ears are shut, and in whose mouth there are no sharp words.
In you, O Lord, is my hope: you will give me an answer, O Lord, my God.
I said, Let them not be glad over me; when my foot is moved, let them not be lifted up with pride against me.
My feet are near to falling, and my sorrow is ever before me.
I will make clear my wrongdoing, with sorrow in my heart for my sin.
But they are strong who have hate for me without cause: those who are against me falsely are increased in numbers.
They give me back evil for good; they are my haters because I go after the thing which is right.
Do not give me up, O Lord; O my God, be near to me.
Come quickly to give me help, O Lord, my salvation.To the chief music-maker. Of Jeduthun. A Psalm. Of David.
I said, I will give attention to my ways, so that my tongue may do no wrong; I will keep my mouth under control, while the sinner is before me.
I made no sound, I said no word, even of good; and I was moved with sorrow.
My heart was burning in my breast; while I was deep in thought the fire was lighted; then I said with my tongue,
Lord, give me knowledge of my end, and of the measure of my days, so that I may see how feeble I am.
You have made my days no longer than a hand's measure; and my years are nothing in your eyes; truly, every man is but a breath. (Selah.)
Truly, every man goes on his way like an image; he is troubled for no purpose: he makes a great store of wealth, and has no knowledge of who will get it.
And now, Lord, what am I waiting for? my hope is in you.
Make me free from all my sins; do not let me be shamed by the man of evil behaviour.
I was quiet, and kept my mouth shut; because you had done it.
No longer let your hand be hard on me; I am wasted by the blows of your hand.
By the weight of your wrath against man's sin, the glory of his form is wasted away; truly every man is but a breath. (Selah.)
Let my prayer come to your ears, O Lord, and give attention to my cry, make an answer to my weeping: for my time here is short before you, and in a little time I will be gone, like all my fathers.
Let your wrath be turned away from me, so that I may be comforted, before I go away from here, and become nothing.To the chief music-maker. Of David. A Psalm.
When I was waiting quietly for the Lord, his heart was turned to me, and he gave ear to my cry.
He took me up out of a deep waste place, out of the soft and sticky earth; he put my feet on a rock, and made my steps certain.
And he put a new song in my mouth, even praise to our God; numbers have seen it with fear, and put their faith in the Lord.
Happy is the man who has faith in the Lord, and does not give honour to the men of pride or to those who are turned away to deceit.
O Lord my God, great are the wonders which you have done in your thought for us; it is not possible to put them out in order before you; when I would give an account of them, their number is greater than I may say.
You had no desire for offerings of beasts or fruits of the earth; ears you made for me: for burned offerings and sin offerings you made no request.
Then I said, See, I come; it is recorded of me in the roll of the book,
My delight is to do your pleasure, O my God; truly, your law is in my heart.
I have given news of righteousness in the great meeting; O Lord, you have knowledge that I have not kept back my words.
Your righteousness has not been folded away in my heart; I have made clear your true word and your salvation; I have not kept secret your mercy or your faith from the great meeting.
Take not away your gentle mercies from me, O Lord; let your mercy and your faith keep me safe for ever.
For unnumbered evils are round about me; my sins have overtaken me, so that I am bent down with their weight; they are more than the hairs of my head, my strength is gone because of them.
Be pleased, O Lord, to take me out of danger; O Lord, come quickly and give me help.
Let those who go after my soul for its destruction have shame and trouble together; let them be turned back and made foolish who take pleasure in my trouble.
Let those who say to me, Aha, aha! be surprised because of their shame.
Let all those who are looking for you be glad and have joy in you; let the lovers of your salvation ever say, May the Lord be great.
Though I am poor and in need, the Lord has me in mind; you are my help and my saviour; let there be no waiting, O my God.To the chief music-maker. A Psalm. Of David.
Happy is the man who gives thought to the poor; the Lord will be his saviour in the time of trouble.
The Lord will keep him safe, and give him life; the Lord will let him be a blessing on the earth, and will not give him into the hand of his haters.
The Lord will be his support on his bed of pain: by you will all his grief be turned to strength.
I said, Lord, have mercy on me; make my soul well, because my faith is in you.
My haters say evil against me, When will he be dead, and his name come to an end?
If one comes to see me, deceit is in his heart; he keeps a store of evil, which he makes public in every place.
All my haters are talking secretly together against me; they are designing my downfall.
They say, He has an evil disease, which will not let him go: and now that he is down he will not get up again.
Even my dearest friend, in whom I had faith, who took bread with me, is turned against me.
But you, O Lord, have mercy on me, lifting me up, so that I may give them their punishment.
By this I see that you have pleasure in me, because my hater does not overcome me.
And as for me, you are my support in my righteousness, giving me a place before your face for ever.
May the Lord God of Israel be praised, through eternal days and for ever. So be it. So be it.To the chief music-maker. Maschil. Of the sons of Korah.
Like the desire of the roe for the water-streams, so is my soul's desire for you, O God.
My soul is dry for need of God, the living God; when may I come and see the face of God?
My tears have been my food day and night, while they keep saying to me, Where is your God?
Let my soul be overflowing with grief when these things come back to my mind, how I went in company to the house of God, with the voice of joy and praise, with the song of those who were keeping the feast.
Why are you crushed down, O my soul? and why are you troubled in me? put your hope in God; for I will again give him praise who is my help and my God.
My soul is crushed down in me, so I will keep you in mind; from the land of Jordan and of the Hermons, from the hill Mizar.
Deepissoundingto deepatthenoiseofyourwaterfalls; allyourwaveshavegonerolling over me.
But the Lord will send his mercy in the daytime, and in the night his song will be with me, a prayer to the God of my life.
I will say to God my Rock, Why have you let me go from your memory? why do I go in sorrow because of the attacks of my haters?
The cruel words of my haters are like a crushing of my bones; when they say to me every day, Where is your God?
Why are you crushed down, O my soul? and why are you troubled in me? put your hope in God; for I will again give him praise who is my help and my God.Be my judge, O God, supporting my cause against a nation without religion; O keep me from the false and evil man.
You are the God of my strength; why have you put me from you? why do I go in sorrow because of the attacks of my haters?
O send out your light and your true word; let them be my guide: let them take me to your holy hill, and to your tents.
Then I will go up to the altar of God, to the God of my joy; I will be glad and give praise to you on an instrument of music, O God, my God.
Why are you crushed down, O my soul? and why are you troubled in me? put your hope in God, for I will again give him praise who is my help and my God.To the chief music-maker. Of the sons of Korah Maschil.
It has come to our ears, O God, our fathers have given us the story, of the works which you did in their days, in the old times,
Uprooting the nations with your hand, and planting our fathers in their place; cutting down the nations, but increasing the growth of your people.
For they did not make the land theirs by their swords, and it was not their arms which kept them safe; but your right hand, and your arm, and the light of your face, because you had pleasure in them.
You are my King and my God; ordering salvation for Jacob.
Through you will we overcome our haters; by your name will they be crushed under our feet who are violent against us.
I will not put faith in my bow, my sword will not be my salvation.
But it is you who have been our saviour from those who were against us, and have put to shame those who had hate for us.
Our pride is in God at all times, to his name we give praise for ever. (Selah.)
But now you have sent us away from you, and put us to shame; you do not go out with our armies.
Because of this we are turned back by the attacker: those who have hate for us take our goods for themselves.
You have made us like sheep which are taken for meat; we are put to flight among the nations.
You let your people go for nothing; your wealth is not increased by their price.
You have made us to be looked down on by our neighbours, we are laughed at and shamed by those who are round about us.
Our name is a word of shame among the nations, a sign for the shaking of heads among the peoples.
My downfall is ever before me, and I am covered with the shame of my face;
Because of the voice of him who says sharp and bitter words; because of the hater and him who is the instrument of punishment.
All this has come on us, but still we have kept you in our memory; and we have not been false to your word.
Our hearts have not gone back, and our steps have not been turned out of your way;
Though you have let us be crushed in the place of jackals, though we are covered with darkest shade.
If the name of our God has gone out of our minds, or if our hands have been stretched out to a strange god,
Will not God make search for it? for he sees the secrets of the heart.
Truly, because of you we are put to death every day; we are numbered like sheep for destruction.
Why are you sleeping, O Lord? awake! and come to our help, do not give us up for ever.
Why is your face covered, and why do you give no thought to our trouble and our cruel fate?
For our souls are crushed down to the dust: our bodies are stretched out on the earth.
Up! and come to our help, and give us salvation because of your mercy.To the chief music-maker; put to Shoshannim. Of the sons of Korah. Maschil. A Song of loves.
My heart is flowing over with good things; my words are of that which I have made for a king; my tongue is the pen of a ready writer.
You are fairer than the children of men; grace is flowing through your lips; for this cause the blessing of God is with you for ever.
Put on your sword, make it ready at your side, O strong chief, with your glory and power.
And go nobly on in your power, because you are good and true and without pride; and your right hand will be teaching you things of fear.
Your arrows are sharp in the heart of the king's haters; because of them the peoples are falling under you.
Your seat of power, O God, is for ever and ever; the rod of your kingdom is a rod of honour.
You have been a lover of righteousness and a hater of evil: and so God, your God, has put the oil of joy on your head, lifting you high over all other kings.
Your robes are full of the smell of all sorts of perfumes and spices; music from the king's ivory houses has made you glad.
Kings' daughters are among your noble women: on your right is the queen in gold of Ophir.
O daughter, give thought and attention, and let your ear be open; no longer keep in mind your people, and your father's house;
So will the king have a great desire for you, seeing how beautiful you are; because he is your lord, give him honour.
And the daughtersof Tyre will be there with an offering; those who have wealth among the people will be looking for your approval.
In the great house the king's daughter is all shining: her clothing is worked with gold.
She will come before the king in robes of needlework; the virgins in her train will come before you.
With joy and rapture will they come; they will go into the king's house.
Your children will take the place of your fathers; so that you may make them rulers over all the earth.
I will keep the memory of your name living through all generations; and because of this the people will give you praise for ever.To the chief music-maker. Of the sons of Korah; put to Alamoth. A Song.
God is our harbour and our strength, a very present help in trouble.
For this cause we will have no fear, even though the earth is changed, and though the mountains are moved in the heart of the sea;
Though its waters are sounding and troubled, and though the mountains are shaking with their violent motion. (Selah.)
There is a river whose streams make glad the resting-place of God, the holy place of the tents of the Most High.
God has taken his place in her; she will not be moved: he will come to her help at the dawn of morning.
The nations were angry, the kingdoms were moved; at the sound of his voice the earth became like wax.
The Lord of armies is with us; the God of Jacob is our high tower. (Selah.)
Come, see the works of the Lord, the destruction which he has made in the earth.
He puts an end to wars over all the earth; by him the bow is broken, and the spear cut in two, and the carriage burned in the fire.
Be at peace in the knowledge that I am God: I will be lifted up among the nations, I will be honoured through all the earth.
The Lord of armies is with us; the God of Jacob is our high tower. (Selah.)To the chief music-maker. A Psalm. Of the sons of Korah.
O make a glad noise with your hands, all you peoples; letting your voices go up to God with joy.
For the Lord Most High is to be feared; he is a great King over all the earth.
He will put down the peoples under us, and the nations under our feet.
He will give us our heritage, the glory of Jacob who is dear to him. (Selah.)
God has gone up with a glad cry, the Lord with the sound of the horn.
Give praises to God, make songs of praise; give praises to our King, make songs of praise.
For God is the King of all the earth; make songs of praise with knowledge.
God is the ruler over the nations; God is on the high seat of his holy rule.
The rulers of the peoples have come together, with the people of the God of Abraham; because the powers of the earth are God's: he is lifted up on high.A Song. A Psalm. Of the sons of Korah.
Great is the Lord and greatly to be praised, in the town of our God, in his holy mountain.
Beautiful in its high position, the joy of all the earth, is the mountain of Zion, the mountain of God, the town of the great King.
In its buildings God is seen to be a high tower.
For see! the kings came together by agreement, they were joined together.
They saw it, and so were full of wonder; they were troubled, and went quickly away in fear.
Shaking came on them and pain, as on a woman in childbirth.
By you the ships of Tarshish are broken as by an east wind.
As it came to our ears so have we seen it, in the town of the Lord of armies, in the town of our God; God will keep it fixed for ever. (Selah.)
Our thoughts were of your mercy, O God, while we were in your Temple.
As your name is, O God, so is your praise to the ends of the earth; your right hand is full of righteousness.
Let there be joy in the mountain of Zion, and let the daughters of Judah be glad, because of your wise decisions.
Make your way about Zion, and go round it, numbering its towers.
Take note of its strong walls, looking well at its fair buildings; so that you may give word of it to the generation which comes after.
Because this God is our God for ever and ever: he will be our guide.Alamoth. To the chief music-maker. Of the sons of Korah. A Psalm.
Give attention to this, all you peoples; let your ears be open, all you who are living in the world.
High and low together, the poor, and those who have wealth.
From my mouth will come words of wisdom; and in the thoughts of my heart will be knowledge.
I will put my teaching into a story; I will make my dark sayings clear with music.
What cause have I for fear in the days of evil, when the evil-doing of those who are working for my downfall is round about me?
Even of those whose faith is in their wealth, and whose hearts are lifted up because of their stores.
Truly, no man may get back his soul for a price, or give to God the payment for himself;
(Because it takes a great price to keep his soul from death, and man is not able to give it.)
So that he might have eternal life, and never see the underworld.
For he sees that wise men come to their end, and foolish persons of low behaviour come to destruction together, letting their wealth go to others.
The place of the dead is their house for ever, and their resting-place through all generations; those who come after them give their names to their lands.
But man, like the animals, does not go on for ever; he comes to an end like the beasts.
This is the way of the foolish; their silver is for those who come after them, and their children get the pleasure of their gold. (Selah.)
Death will give them their food like sheep; the underworld is their fate and they will go down into it; their flesh is food for worms; their form is wasted away; the underworld is their resting-place for ever.
But God will get back my soul; for he will take me from the power of death. (Selah.)
Have no fear when wealth comes to a man, and the glory of his house is increased;
For at his death, he will take nothing away; his glory will not go down after him.
Though he might have pride in his soul in his life-time, and men will give you praise if you do well for yourself,
He will go to the generation of his fathers; he will not see the light again.
Man, like the animals, does not go on for ever; he comes to an end like the beasts.A Psalm. Of Asaph.
The God of gods, even the Lord, has sent out his voice, and the earth is full of fear; from the coming up of the sun to its going down.
From Zion, most beautiful of places, God has sent out his light.
Our God will come, and will not keep quiet; with fire burning before him, and storm- winds round him.
His voice will go out to the heavens and to the earth, for the judging of his people:
Let my saints come together to me; those who have made an agreement with me by offerings.
And let the heavens make clear his righteousness; for God himself is the judge. (Selah.)
Give ear, O my people, to my words; O Israel, I will be a witness against you; I am God, even your God.
I will not take up a cause against you because of your offerings, or because of your burned offerings, which are ever before me.
I will take no ox out of your house, or he-goats from your flocks;
For every beast of the woodland is mine, and the cattle on a thousand hills.
I see all the birds of the mountains, and the beasts of the field are mine.
If I had need of food, I would not give you word of it; for the earth is mine and all its wealth.
Am I to take the flesh of the ox for my food, or the blood of goats for my drink?
Make an offering of praise to God; keep the agreements which you have made with the Most High;
Let your voice come up to me in the day of trouble; I will be your saviour, so that you may give glory to me.
But to the sinner, God says, What are you doing, talking of my laws, or taking the words of my agreement in your mouth?
Seeing that you have no desire for my teaching, turning your back on my words.
When you saw a thief, you were in agreement with him, and you were joined with those who took other men's wives.
You have given your mouth to evil, your tongue to words of deceit.
You say evil of your brother; you make false statements against your mother's son.
These things have you done, and I said nothing; it seemed to you that I was such a one as yourself; but I will make a protest against you, and put them in order before your eyes.
Now keep this in mind, you who have no memory of God, for fear that you may be crushed under my hand, with no one to give you help:
Whoever makes an offering of praise gives glory to me; and to him who is upright in his ways I will make clear the salvation of God.To the chief music-maker. A Psalm. Of David. When Nathan the prophet came to him, after he had gone in to Bath-sheba.
Have pity on me, O God, in your mercy; out of a full heart, take away my sin.
Let all my wrongdoing be washed away, and make me clean from evil.
For I am conscious of my error; my sin is ever before me.
Against you, you only, have I done wrong, working that which is evil in your eyes; so that your words may be seen to be right, and you may be clear when you are judging.
Truly, I was formed in evil, and in sin did my mother give me birth.
Your desire is for what is true in the inner parts: in the secrets of my soul you will give me knowledge of wisdom.
Make me free from sin with hyssop: let me be washed whiter than snow.
Make me full of joy and rapture; so that the bones which have been broken may be glad.
Let your face be turned from my wrongdoing, and take away all my sins.
Make a clean heart in me, O God; give me a right spirit again.
Do not put me away from before you, or take your holy spirit from me.
Give me back the joy of your salvation; let a free spirit be my support.
Then will I make your ways clear to wrongdoers; and sinners will be turned to you.
Be my saviour from violent death, O God, the God of my salvation; and my tongue will give praise to your righteousness.
O Lord, let my lips be open, so that my mouth may make clear your praise.
You have no desire for an offering or I would give it; you have no delight in burned offerings.
The offerings of God are a broken spirit; a broken and sorrowing heart, O God, you will not put from you.
Do good to Zion in your good pleasure, building up the walls of Jerusalem.
Then you will have delight in the offerings of righteousness, in burned offerings and offerings of beasts; then they will make offerings of oxen on your altar.To the chief music-maker. Maschil. Of David. When Doeg the Edomite came to Saul saying, David has come to the house of Ahimelech.
Why do you take pride in wrongdoing, lifting yourself up against the upright man all the day?
Purposing destruction, using deceit; your tongue is like a sharp blade.
You have more love for evil than for good, for deceit than for works of righteousness. (Selah.)
Destruction is in all your words, O false tongue.
But God will put an end to you for ever; driving you out from your tent, uprooting you from the land of the living. (Selah.)
The upright will see it with fear, and will say, laughing at you:
See, this is the man who did not make God his strength, but had faith in his goods and his property, and made himself strong in his wealth.
But I am like a branching olive-tree in the house of God; I have put my faith in his mercy for ever and ever.
I will give you praise without end for what you have done; I will give honour to your name before your saints, for it is good.To the chief music-maker; put to Mahalath. Maschil. Of David.
The foolish man has said in his heart, God will not do anything. They are unclean, they have done evil works; there is not one who does good.
God was looking down from heaven on the children of men, to see if there were any who had wisdom, searching after God.
Every one of them has gone back; they are unclean: there is not one who does good, no, not one.
Have the workers of evil no knowledge? they take my people for food, as they would take bread; they make no prayer to God.
They were in great fear, where there was no cause for fear: for the bones of those who make war on you have been broken by God; you have put them to shame, because God has no desire for them.
May the salvation of Israel come out of Zion! When the fate of his people is changed by God, Jacob will have joy, and Israel will be glad.To the chief music-maker; on Neginoth. Maschil. Of David. When the Ziphites came and said to Saul, Is not David keeping himself secret among us?
Let your name be my salvation, O God; let my cause be judged by your strength.
Let my prayer come before you, O God; give ear to the words of my mouth.
For men who are going after me have come out against me, violent men are purposing to take my soul; they have not put God before their eyes. (Selah.)
See, God is my helper: the Lord is the great supporter of my soul.
Let the evil works of my haters come back on them again; let them be cut off by your good faith.
Freely will I make my offerings to you; I will give praise to your name, O Lord, for it is good.
Because it has been my saviour from all my trouble; and my eyes have seen the punishment of my haters.To the chief music-maker, on Neginoth. Maschil. Of David.
Give hearing to my prayer, O God; and let not your ear be shut against my request.
Give thought to me, and let my prayer be answered: I have been made low in sorrow;
I am troubled because of the voice of the cruel ones, because of the loud cry of the evil-doers; for they put a weight of evil on me, and they are cruel in their hate for me.
My heart is deeply wounded, and the fear of death has come on me.
Fear and shaking have come over me, with deep fear I am covered.
And I said, If only I had wings like a dove! for then I would go in flight from here and be at rest.
I would go wandering far away, living in the waste land. (Selah.)
I would quickly take cover from the driving storm and from the violent wind.
Send destruction on them, O Lord, make a division of tongues among them: for I have seen fighting and violent acts in the town.
By day and night they go round the town, on the walls; trouble and sorrow are in the heart of it.
Evil is there; cruel rule and deceit are ever in the streets.
For it was not my hater who said evil of me; that would have been no grief to me; it was not one outside the number of my friends who made himself strong against me, or I would have kept myself from him in a secret place;
But it was you, my equal, my guide, my well-loved friend.
We had loving talk together, and went to the house of God in company.
Let the hand of death come on them suddenly, and let them go down living into the underworld; because evil is in their houses and in their hearts.
As for me, I will make my prayer to God, and he will be my saviour.
In the evening and in the morning and in the middle of the day I will make my prayer with sounds of grief; and my voice will come to his ears.
He has taken my soul away from the attack which was made against me, and given it peace; for great numbers were against me.
God will give thought to me; he who from early times is strong will send pain and trouble on them. (Selah.) Because they are unchanged, they have no fear of God.
He has put out his hand against those who were at peace with him; he has not kept his agreement.
The words of his mouth were smoother than butter, but war was in his heart; his words were softer than oil, but they were sharp swords.
Put your cares on the Lord, and he will be your support; he will not let the upright man be moved.
But you, O God, will send them down into the underworld; the cruel and the false will be cut off before half their days are ended; but I will have faith in you.To the chief music-maker; put to Jonath elem rehokim. Of David. Michtam. When the Philistines took him in Gath.
Have mercy on me, O God, for man is attempting my destruction; every day he makes cruel attacks against me.
My haters are ever ready to put an end to me; great numbers are lifting themselves up against me.
In the time of my fear, I will have faith in you.
In God will I give praise to his word; in God have I put my hope; I will have no fear of what flesh may do to me.
Every day they make wrong use of my words; all their thoughts are against me for evil.
They come together, they are waiting in secret places, they take note of my steps, they are waiting for my soul.
By evil-doing they will not get free from punishment. In wrath, O God, let the peoples be made low.
You have seen my wanderings; put the drops from my eyes into your bottle; are they not in your record?
When I send up my cry to you, my haters will be turned back; I am certain of this, for God is with me.
In God will I give praise to his word; in the Lord will I give praise to his word.
In God have I put my hope, I will have no fear of what man may do to me.
I keep the memory of my debt to you, O God; I will give you the offerings of praise.
Becauseyouhavetakenmysoulfromthepowerofdeath; andkeptmyfeetfromfalling, so that I may be walking before God in the light of life.To the chief music-maker; put to Al-tashheth. Michtam. Of David. When he went in flight from Saul, in the hole of the rock.
Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me; for the hope of my soul is in you: I will keep myself safely under the shade of your wings, till these troubles are past.
I will send up my cry to the Most High God; to God who does all things for me.
He will send from heaven, and take me from the power of him whose desire is for my destruction. God will send out his mercy and his good faith.
My soul is among lions; I am stretched out among those who are on fire, even the sons of men, whose teeth are spears and arrows, and whose tongue is a sharp sword.
O God, be lifted up higher than the heavens; let your glory be over all the earth.
They have made ready a net for my steps; my soul is bent down; they have made a great hole before me, and have gone down into it themselves. (Selah.)
My heart is fixed, O God, my heart is fixed; I will make songs, and give praise.
You are my glory; let the instruments of music be awake; I myself will be awake with the dawn.
I will give you praise, O Lord, among the peoples; I will make songs to you among the nations.
For your mercy is great, stretching up to the heavens, and your righteousness goes up to the clouds.
Be lifted up, O God, higher than the heavens, let your glory be over all the earth.To the chief music-maker; put to Al-tashheth. Michtam. Of David.
Is there righteousness in your mouths, O you gods? are you upright judges, O you sons of men?
The purposes of your hearts are evil; your hands are full of cruel doings on the earth.
The evil-doers are strange from the first; from the hour of their birth they go out of the true way, saying false words.
Their poison is like the poison of a snake; they are like the adder, whose ears are shut;
Who will not be moved by the voice of the wonder-worker, however great are his powers.
O God, let their teeth be broken in their mouths; let the great teeth of the young lions be pulled out, O Lord.
Let them be turned to liquid like the ever-flowing waters; let them be cut off like the grass by the way.
Let them be like an after-birth which is turned to water and comes to an end; like the fruit of a woman who gives birth before her time, let them not see the sun.
Before they are conscious of it, let them be cut down like thorns; let a strong wind take them away like waste growth.
The upright man will be glad when he sees their punishment; his feet will be washed in the blood of the evil-doer.
So that men will say, Truly there is a reward for righteousness; truly there is a God who is judge on the earth.To the chief music-maker; put to At-tashheth. Michtam. Of David. When Saul sent, and they were watching the house, to put him to death.
Take me out of the hands of the cruel ones, O my God; keep me safe from those who come up against me.
Take me out of the power of the workers of evil, and keep me safe from the men of blood.
For see, they are watching in secret for my soul; the strong have come together against me? but not because of my sin, or my evil-doing, O Lord.
For no sin of mine they go quickly and get themselves ready; be awake and come to my help, and see.
You, O Lord God of armies, are the God of Israel; come now and give punishment to the nations; have no mercy on any workers of deceit. (Selah.)
They come back in the evening; they make a noise like a dog, and go round the town.
See, hate is dropping from their lips; curses are on their tongues: they say, Who gives attention to it?
But you are laughing at them, O Lord; you will make sport of all the nations.
O my strength, I will put my hope in you; because God is my strong tower.
The God of my mercy will go before me: God will let me see my desire effected on my haters.
Put them not to death, for so my people will keep the memory of them: let them be sent in all directions by your power; make them low, O Lord our saviour.
Because of the sin of their mouths and the word of their lips, let them even be taken in their pride; and for their curses and their deceit,
Put an end to them in your wrath, put an end to them, so that they may not be seen again; let them see that God is ruling in Jacob and to the ends of the earth. (Selah.)
And in the evening let them come back, and make a noise like a dog, and go round the town.
Let them go wandering up and down in search of food, and be there all night if they have not enough.
But I will make songs of your power; yes, I will give cries of joy for your mercy in the morning; because you have been my strength and my high tower in the day of my trouble.
To you, O my strength, will I make my song: because God is my high tower, even the God of my mercy.To the chief music-maker; put to Shushan-eduth. Michtam. Of David. For teaching. When he was fighting against Aram-naharaim and Aramzobah, when Joab came back, and put twelve thousand of the Edomites to death, in the Valley of Salt.
God, you have put us away from you, you have sent us in all directions, you have been angry; O be turned to us again.
By the power of your hand the earth is shaking and broken; make it strong again, for it is moved.
You have made the people see hard times; you have given us the wine of shaking for our drink.
Give a safe place to those who have fear of you, where they may go in flight from before the bow. (Selah.)
So that your loved ones may be made safe, let your right hand be my salvation, and give me an answer.
God has said in his holy place, I will be glad: I will make a division of Shechem, and the valley of Succoth will be measured out.
Gilead is mine, and Manasseh is mine; and Ephraim is the strength of my head; Judah is my law-giver;
Moab is my washpot; over Edom will I put out my shoe; over Philistia will a glad cry be sounded.
Who will take me into the strong town? who will be my guide into Edom?
Have not you put us away, O God? and you have not gone out with our armies.
Give us help in our trouble; for there is no help in man.
Through God we will do great things, for through him our haters will be crushed under our feet.To the chief music-maker. On a corded instrument. Of David.
Let my cry come to you, O God; let your ears be open to my prayer.
From the end of the earth will I send up my cry to you, when my heart is overcome: take me to the rock which is over-high for me.
For you have been my secret place, and my high tower from those who made war on me.
I will make your tent my resting-place for ever: I will keep myself under the cover of your wings. (Selah.)
For you, O God, have made answer to my prayers; you have given me the heritage of those who give honour to your name.
You will give the king long life; and make his years go on through the generations.
May the seat of his authority be before God for ever; may mercy and righteousness keep him safe.
So will I make songs in praise of your name for ever, giving to God that which is right day by day.To the chief music-maker. After Jeduthun. A Psalm. Of David.
My soul, put all your faith in God; for from him comes my salvation.
He only is my Rock and my salvation; he is my high tower; I will not be greatly moved.
How long will you go on designing evil against a man? running against him as against a broken wall, which is on the point of falling?
Their only thought is to put him down from his place of honour; their delight is in deceit: blessing is in their mouths but cursing in their hearts. (Selah.)
My soul, put all your faith in God; for from him comes my hope.
He only is my Rock and my salvation; he is my high tower; I will not be greatly moved.
In God is my salvation, and my glory; the Rock of my strength, and my safe place.
Have faith in him at all times, you people; let your hearts go flowing out before him: God is our safe place. (Selah.)
Truly men of low birth are nothing, and men of high position are not what they seem; if they are put in the scales together they are less than a breath.
Have no faith in the rewards of evil-doing, or in profits wrongly made: if your wealth is increased, do not put your hopes on it.
Once has God said, twice has it come to my ears, that power is God's:
And mercy, O Lord, is yours, for you give to every man the reward of his work.A Psalm. Of David. When he was in the waste land of Judah.
O God, you are my God; early will I make my search for you: my soul is dry for need of you, my flesh is wasted with desire for you, as a dry and burning land where no water is;
To see your power and your glory, as I have seen you in the holy place.
Because your mercy is better than life, my lips will give you praise.
So will I go on blessing you all my life, lifting up my hands in your name.
My soul will be comforted, as with good food; and my mouth will give you praise with songs of joy;
When the memory of you comes to me on my bed, and when I give thought to you in the night-time.
Because you have been my help, I will have joy in the shade of your wings.
My soul keeps ever near you: your right hand is my support.
But those whose desire is my soul's destruction will go down to the lower parts of the earth.
They will be cut off by the sword; they will be food for foxes.
But the king will have joy in God; everyone who takes an oath by him will have cause for pride; but the false mouth will be stopped.To the chief music-maker. A Psalm. Of David.
O God, let the voice of my grief come to your ear: keep my life from the fear of those who are against me.
Keep me safe from the secret purpose of wrongdoers; from the band of the workers of evil;
Who make their tongues sharp like a sword, and whose arrows are pointed, even bitter words;
So that in secret they may let loose their arrows at the upright, suddenly and unseen.
They make themselves strong in an evil purpose; they make holes for secret nets; they say, Who will see it,
Or make discovery of our secret purpose? The design is framed with care; and the inner thought of a man, and his heart, is deep.
But God sends out an arrow against them; suddenly they are wounded.
The evil of their tongues is the cause of their fall; all those who see them are shaking their heads at them.
And in fear men make public the works of God; and giving thought to his acts they get wisdom.
The upright will be glad in the Lord and have hope in him; and all the lovers of righteousness will give him glory.To the chief music-maker. A Psalm. Of David. A Song.
It is right for you, O God, to have praise in Zion: to you let the offering be made.
To you, O hearer of prayer, let the words of all flesh come.
Evils have overcome us: but as for our sins, you will take them away.
Happy is the man of your selection, to whom you give a resting-place in your house; we will be full of the good things out of your holy place.
You will give us an answer in righteousness by great acts of power, O God of our salvation; you who are the hope of all the ends of the earth, and of the far-off lands of the sea;
The God by whose strength the mountains are fixed; who is robed with power:
Who makes the loud voice of the sea quiet, and puts an end to the sound of its waves.
Those in the farthest parts of the earth have fear when they see your signs: the outgoings of the morning and evening are glad because of you.
You have given your blessing to the earth, watering it and making it fertile; the river of God is full of water: and having made it ready, you give men grain.
You make the ploughed lands full of water; you make smooth the slopes: you make the earth soft with showers, sending your blessing on its growth.
The year is crowned with the good you give; life-giving rain is dropping from your footsteps,
Falling on the grass of the waste land: and the little hills are glad on every side.
The grass-land is thick with flocks; the valleys are full of grain; they give glad cries and songs of joy.To the chief music-maker. A Song. A Psalm.
Send up a glad cry to God, all the earth:
Make a song in honour of his name: give praise and glory to him.
Say to God, How greatly to be feared are your works! because of your great power your haters are forced to put themselves under your feet.
Let all the earth give you worship, and make songs to you; let them make songs to your name. (Selah.)
Come and see the works of God: he is to be feared in all he does to the children of men.
The sea was turned into dry land: they went through the river on foot: there did we have joy in him.
He is ruling in power for ever; his eyes are watching the nations: may his haters have no strength against him. (Selah.)
Give blessings to our God, O you peoples, let the voice of his praise be loud;
Because he gives us life, and has not let our feet be moved.
For you, O God, have put us to the test: testing us by fire like silver.
You let us be put in prison; chains were put on our legs.
You let men go driving over our heads; we went through fire and through water; but you took us out into a wide place.
I will come into your house with burned offerings, I will make payment of my debt to you,
Keeping the word which came from my lips, and which my mouth said, when I was in trouble.
I will give you burned offerings of fat beasts, and the smoke of sheep; I will make offerings of oxen and goats. (Selah.)
Come, give ear to me, all you God-fearing men, so that I may make clear to you what he has done for my soul.
My voice went up to him, and I was lifted up from the underworld.
I said in my heart, The Lord will not give ear to me:
But truly God's ear has been open; he has give attention to the voice of my prayer.
Praise be to God who has not taken away his good faith and his mercy from me.To the chief music-maker. With corded instruments. A Psalm. A Song.
May God give us mercy and blessing, and let the light of his face be shining on us; (Selah.)
So that men may see your way on the earth, and your salvation among all nations.
Let the peoples give you praise, O God; let all the peoples give you praise.
O let the nations be glad, and make song of joy; for you will be the judge of the peoples in righteousness, guiding the nations of the earth. (Selah.)
Let the peoples give you praise, O God; let all the peoples give you praise.
The earth has given her increase; and God, even our God, will give us his blessing.
God will give us his blessing; so let all the ends of the earth be in fear of him.To the chief music-maker. Of David. A Psalm. A Song.
Let God be seen, and let his haters be put to flight; let those who are against him be turned back before him.
Let them be like smoke before the driving wind; as wax turning soft before the fire, so let them come to an end before the power of God.
But let the upright be glad; let them have delight before God; let them be full of joy.
Make songs to God, make songs of praise to his name; make a way for him who comes through the waste lands; his name is Jah; be glad before him.
A father to those who have no father, a judge of the widows, is God in his holy place.
Those who are without friends, God puts in families; he makes free those who are in chains; but those who are turned away from him are given a dry land.
O God, when you went out before your people, wandering through the waste land; (Selah.)
The earth was shaking and the heavens were streaming, because God was present; even Sinai itself was moved before God, the God of Israel.
You, O God, did freely send the rain, giving strength to the weariness of your heritage.
Those whose resting-place was there, even the poor, were comforted by your good things, O God.
The Lord gives the word; great is the number of the women who make it public.
Kings of armies quickly go in flight: and the women in the houses make a division of their goods.
Will you take your rest among the flocks? like the wings of a dove covered with silver, and its feathers with yellow gold.
When the Most High put the kings to flight, it was as white as snow in Salmon.
A hill of God is the hill of Bashan; a hill with high tops is the hill of Bashan.
Why are you looking with envy, you high hills, on the hill desired by God as his resting- place? truly, God will make it his house for ever.
The war-carriage of God is among Israel's thousands; the Lord has come from Sinai to the holy place.
You have gone up on high, taking your prisoners with you; you have taken offerings from men; the Lord God has taken his place on the seat of his power.
Praise be to the Lord, who is our support day by day, even the God of our salvation. (Selah.)
Our God is for us a God of salvation; his are the ways out of death.
The heads of the haters of God will be crushed; even the head of him who still goes on in his evil ways.
The Lord said, I will make them come back from Bashan, and from the deep parts of the sea;
So that your foot may be red with blood, and the tongues of your dogs with the same.
We see your going, O God: even the going of my God, my King, into the holy place.
The makers of songs go before, the players of music come after, among the young girls playing on brass instruments.
Give praise to God in the great meeting; even the Lord, you who come from the fountain of Israel.
There is little Benjamin ruling them, the chiefs of Judah and their army, the rulers of Zebulun and the rulers of Naphtali.
O God, send out your strength; the strength, O God, with which you have done great things for us,
Out of your Temple in Jerusalem.
Say sharp words to the beast among the water-plants, the band of strong ones, with the lords of the peoples, put an end to the people whose delight is in war.
Kings will give you offerings, they will come out of Egypt; from Pathros will come offerings of silver; Ethiopia will be stretching out her hands to God.
Make songs to God, you kingdoms of the earth; O make songs of praise to the Lord; (Selah.)
To him who goes or the clouds of heaven, the heaven which was from earliest times; he sends out his voice of power.
Make clear that strength is God's: he is lifted up over Israel, and his power is in the clouds.
O God, you are to be feared in your holy place: the God of Israel gives strength and power to his people. Praise be to God.To the chief music-maker; put to Shoshannim. Of David.
Be my saviour, O God; because the waters have come in, even to my neck.
My feet are deep in the soft earth, where there is no support; I have come into deep waters, the waves are flowing over me.
I am tired with my crying; my throat is burning: my eyes are wasted with waiting for my God.
Those who have hate for me without cause are greater in number than the hairs of my head; those who are against me, falsely desiring my destruction, are very strong; I gave back what I had not taken away.
O God, you see how foolish I am; and my wrongdoing is clear to you.
Let not those who have hope in you be put to shame because of me, O Lord God of armies: let not those who are waiting for you be made low because of me, O God of Israel.
I have been wounded with sharp words because of you; my face has been covered with shame.
I have become strange to my brothers, and like a man from a far country to my mother's children.
I am on fire with passion for your house; and the hard things which are said about you have come on me.
My bitter weeping, and my going without food, were turned to my shame.
When I put on the clothing of grief, they said evil of me.
I am a cause of wonder to those in authority; a song to those who are given to strong drink.
But as for me, let my prayer be made to you, O Lord, at a time when you are pleased; O God, give me an answer in your great mercy, for your salvation is certain.
Take me from the grip of the sticky earth, so that I may not go down into it; let me be lifted up from the deep waters.
Let me not be covered by the flowing waters; let not the deep waters go over my head, and let me not be shut up in the underworld.
Give an answer to my words, O Lord; for your mercy is good: be turned to me, because of your great pity.
Let not your face be covered from your servant, for I am in trouble; quickly give me an answer.
Come near to my soul, for its salvation: be my saviour, because of those who are against me.
You have seen my shame, how I was laughed at and made low; my haters are all before you.
My heart is broken by bitter words, I am full of grief; I made a search for some to have pity on me, but there was no one; I had no comforter.
They gave me poison for my food; and bitter wine for my drink.
Let their table before them be for their destruction; let their feasts become a net to take them.
Let their eyes be blind so that they may not see; let their bodies for ever be shaking.
Let your curse come on them; let the heat of your wrath overtake them.
Give their houses to destruction, and let there be no one in their tents.
Because they are cruel to him against whom your hand is turned; they make bitter the grief of him who is wounded by you.
Let their punishment be increased; let them not come into your righteousness.
Let their names be taken from the book of the living, let them not be numbered with the upright.
But I am poor and full of sorrow; let me be lifted up by your salvation, O Lord.
I will give praise to the name of God with a song; I will give glory to him for what he has done.
This will be more pleasing to the Lord than an ox, or a young ox of full growth.
The poor will see it and be glad: you who are lovers of God, let your hearts have life.
For the ears of the Lord are open to the poor, and he takes thought for his prisoners.
Let the heavens and the earth give praise to him, the seas, and everything moving in them.
For God will be the saviour of Zion, and the builder of the towns of Judah; so that it may be their resting-place and heritage.
The seed of his servants will have their part in it, and there the lovers of his name will have rest.To the chief music-maker. Of David. To keep in memory.
Let your salvation come quickly, O God; come quickly to my help, O Lord.
Let those who go after my soul have shame and trouble; let those who have evil designs against me be turned back and made foolish.
Let those who say Aha, aha! be turned back as a reward of their shame.
Let all those who are looking for you be glad and have joy in you; let the lovers of your salvation ever say, May God be great.
But I am poor and in need; come to me quickly, O God; you are my help and my saviour; let there be no waiting, O Lord.In you, O Lord, have I put my hope; let me never be shamed.
Keep me safe in your righteousness, and come to my help; give ear to my voice, and be my saviour.
Be my strong Rock, the strong place of my salvation; for you are my Rock, and my safe place.
O my God, take me out of the hand of the sinner, out of the hand of the evil and cruel man.
For you are my hope, O Lord God; I have had faith in you from the time when I was young.
You have been my support from the day of my birth; you took me out of my mother's body; my praise will be ever of you.
I am a wonder to all; but you are my strong tower.
My mouth will be full of your praise and glory all the day.
Do not give me up when I am old; be my help even when my strength is gone.
For my haters are waiting secretly for me; and those who are watching for my soul are banded together in their evil designs,
Saying, God has given him up; go after him and take him, for he has no helper.
O God, be not far from me; O my God, come quickly to my help.
Let those who say evil against my soul be overcome and put to shame; let my haters be made low and have no honour.
But I will go on ever hoping, and increasing in all your praise.
My mouth will make clear your righteousness and your salvation all the day; for they are more than may be measured.
I will give news of the great acts of the Lord God; my words will be of your righteousness, and of yours only.
O God, you have been my teacher from the time when I was young; and I have been talking of your works of wonder even till now.
Now when I am old and grey-headed, O God, give me not up; till I have made clear your strength to this generation, and your power to all those to come.
Your righteousness, O God, is very high; you have done great things; O God, who is like you?
You, who have sent great and bitter troubles on me, will give me life again, lifting me up from the deep waters of the underworld.
You will make me greater than before, and give me comfort on every side.
I will give praise to you with instruments of music, O my God, for you are true; I will make songs to you with music, O Holy One of Israel.
Joy will be on my lips when I make melody to you; and in my soul, to which you have given salvation.
My tongue will be talking of your righteousness all the day; for those whose purpose is to do me evil have been crushed and put to shame.Of Solomon.
Give the king your authority, O God, and your righteousness to the king's son.
May he be a judge of your people in righteousness, and make true decisions for the poor.
May the mountains give peace to the people, and the hills righteousness.
May he be a judge of the poor among the people, may he give salvation to the children of those who are in need; by him let the violent be crushed.
May his life go on as long as the sun and moon, through all generations.
May he come down like rain on the cut grass; like showers watering the earth.
In his days may the upright do well, living in peace as long as there is a moon in heaven.
Let his kingdom be from sea to sea, from the River to the ends of the earth.
Let those who are against him go down before him; and let his haters be low in the dust.
Let the kings of Tarshish and of the islands come back with offerings; let the kings of Sheba and Seba give of their stores.
Yes, let all kings go down before him; let all nations be his servants.
For he will be a saviour to the poor in answer to his cry; and to him who is in need, without a helper.
He will have pity on the poor, and be the saviour of those who are in need.
He will keep their souls free from evil designs and violent attacks; and their blood will be of value in his eyes.
May he have long life, and may gold from Sheba be given to him: may prayers be made for him at all times; may blessings be on him every day.
May there be wide-stretching fields of grain in the land, shaking on the top of the mountains, full of fruit like Lebanon: may its stems be unnumbered like the grass of the earth.
May his name go on for ever, as long as the sun: may men be blessing themselves by him; may all nations be blessing his name.
Praise be to the Lord God, the God of Israel, the only doer of wonders.
Praise to the glory of his noble name for ever; let all the earth be full of his glory. So be it, So be it.
The prayers of David, the son of Jesse, are ended.A Psalm. Of Asaph.
Truly, God is good to Israel, even to such as are clean in heart.
But as for me, my feet had almost gone from under me; I was near to slipping;
Because of my envy of the men of pride, when I saw the well-being of the wrongdoers.
For they have no pain; their bodies are fat and strong.
They are not in trouble as others are; they have no part in the unhappy fate of men.
For this reason pride is round them like a chain; they are clothed with violent behaviour as with a robe.
Their eyes are bursting with fat; they have more than their heart's desire.
Their thoughts are deep with evil designs; their talk from their seats of power is of cruel acts.
Their mouth goes up to heaven; their tongues go walking through the earth.
For this reason they are full of bread; and water is ever flowing for them.
And they say, How will the Lord see this? is there knowledge in the Most High?
Truly, such are the sinners; they do well at all times, and their wealth is increased.
As for me, I have made my heart clean to no purpose, washing my hands in righteousness;
For I have been troubled all the day; every morning have I undergone punishment.
If I would make clear what it is like, I would say, You are false to the generation of your children.
When my thoughts were turned to see the reason of this, it was a weariness in my eyes;
Till I went into God's holy place, and saw the end of the evil-doers.
You put their feet where there was danger of slipping, so that they go down into destruction.
How suddenly are they wasted! fears are the cause of their destruction.
As a dream when one is awake, they are ended; they are like an image gone out of mind when sleep is over.
My heart was made bitter, and I was pained by the bite of grief:
As for me, I was foolish, and without knowledge; I was like a beast before you.
But still I am ever with you; you have taken me by my right hand.
Your wisdom will be my guide, and later you will put me in a place of honour.
Whom have I in heaven but you? and having you I have no desire for anything on earth.
My flesh and my heart are wasting away: but God is the Rock of my heart and my eternal heritage.
For those who are far away from you will come to destruction: you will put an end to all those who have not kept faith with you.
But it is good for me to come near to God: I have put my faith in the Lord God, so that I may make clear all his works.Maschil. Of Asaph.
Of God, why have you put us away from you for ever? why is the fire of your wrath smoking against the sheep who are your care?
Keep in mind your band of worshippers, for whom you gave payment in the days which are past, whom you took for yourself as the people of your heritage; even this mountain of Zion, which has been your resting-place.
Go up and see the unending destruction; all the evil which your haters have done in the holy place;
Sending out their voices like lions among your worshippers; they have put up their signs to be seen.
They are cutting down, like a man whose blade is lifted up against the thick trees.
Your doors are broken down with hammers and iron blades.
They have put on fire your holy place; they have made the place of your name unclean, pulling it down to the earth.
They have said in their hearts, Let us put an end to them all together; they have given over to the fire all God's places of worship in the land.
We do not see our signs: there is no longer any prophet, or anyone among us to say how long.
O God, how long will those who are against us say cruel things? will the hater go on looking down on your name for ever?
Why are you keeping back your hand, and covering your right hand in your robe?
For from the past God is my King, working salvation in the earth.
The sea was parted in two by your strength; the heads of the great sea-beasts were broken.
The heads of the great snake were crushed by you; you gave them as food to the fishes of the sea.
You made valleys for fountains and springs; you made the ever-flowing rivers dry.
The day is yours and the night is yours: you made the light and the sun.
By you all the limits of the earth were fixed; you have made summer and winter.
Keep this in mind, O Lord, that your haters have said cruel things, and that your name has been looked down on by a people of evil behaviour.
O give not the soul of your dove to the hawk; let not the life of the poor go out of your memory for ever.
Keep in mind your undertaking; for the dark places of the earth are full of pride and cruel acts.
O let not the crushed be turned back in shame; let the low man and the poor give praise to your name.
Up! O God, be the judge of your cause; keep in mind the bitter things which the man of evil behaviour says against you every day.
Keep in mind the voice of your haters; the outcry of those who come against you goes up every day.To the chief music-maker; put to Al-tashheth. A Psalm. Of Asaph. A Song.
To you, O God, we give praise, to you we give praise: and those who give honour to your name make clear your works of power.
When the right time has come, I will be the judge in righteousness.
When the earth and all its people become feeble, I am the support of its pillars. (Selah.)
I say to the men of pride, Let your pride be gone: and to the sinners, Let not your horn be lifted up.
Let not your horn be lifted up: let no more words of pride come from your outstretched necks.
For honour does not come from the east, or from the west, or uplifting from the south;
But God is the judge, putting down one, and lifting up another.
For in the hand of the Lord is a cup, and the wine is red; it is well mixed, overflowing from his hand: he will make all the sinners of the earth take of it, even to the last drop.
But I will ever be full of joy, making songs of praise to the God of Jacob.
By him will all the horns of the sinners be cut off; but the horns of the upright will be lifted up.To the chief music-maker; put to Neginoth. A Psalm. Of Asaph. A Song.
In Judah is the knowledge of God; his name is great in Israel,
In Salem is his tent, his resting-place in Zion.
There were the arrows of the bow broken, there he put an end to body-cover, sword, and fight. (Selah.)
You are shining and full of glory, more than the eternal mountains.
Gone is the wealth of the strong, their last sleep has overcome them; the men of war have become feeble.
At the voice of your wrath, O God of Jacob, deep sleep has overcome carriage and horse.
You, you are to be feared; who may keep his place before you in the time of your wrath?
From heaven you gave your decision; the earth, in its fear, gave no sound,
When God took his place as judge, for the salvation of the poor on the earth. (Selah.)
The ... will give you praise; the rest of ...
Give to the Lord your God what is his by right; let all who are round him give offerings to him who is to be feared.
He puts an end to the wrath of rulers; he is feared by the kings of the earth.To the chief music-maker. After Jeduthun. Of Asaph. A Psalm.
I was crying to God with my voice; even to God with my voice, and he gave ear to me.
In the day of my trouble, my heart was turned to the Lord: my hand was stretched out in the night without resting; my soul would not be comforted.
I will keep God in memory, with sounds of grief; my thoughts are troubled, and my spirit is overcome. (Selah.)
You keep my eyes from sleep; I am so troubled that no words come.
My thoughts go back to the days of the past, to the years which are gone.
The memory of my song comes back to me in the night; my thoughts are moving in my heart; my spirit is searching with care.
Will the Lord put me away for ever? will he be kind no longer?
Is his mercy quite gone for ever? has his word come to nothing?
Has God put away the memory of his pity? are his mercies shut up by his wrath? (Selah.)
And I said, It is a weight on my spirit; but I will keep in mind the years of the right hand of the Most High.
I will keep in mind the works of Jah: I will keep the memory of your wonders in the past.
I will give thought to all your work, while my mind goes over your acts of power.
Your way, O God, is holy: what god is so great as our God?
You are the God who does works of power: you have made your strength clear to the nations.
With your arm you have made your people free, the sons of Jacob and Joseph. (Selah.)
The waters saw you, O God; the waters saw you, they were in fear: even the deep was troubled.
The clouds sent out water; the skies gave out a sound; truly, your arrows went far and wide.
The voice of your thunder went rolling on; the world was flaming with the light of the storm; the earth was shaking.
Your way was in the sea, and your road in the great waters; there was no knowledge of your footsteps.
You were guiding your people like a flock, by the hand of Moses and Aaron.Maschil. Of Asaph.
Give ear, O my people, to my law; let your ears be bent down to the words of my mouth.
Opening my mouth I will give out a story, even the dark sayings of old times;
Which have come to our hearing and our knowledge, as they were given to us by our fathers.
We will not keep them secret from our children; we will make clear to the coming generation the praises of the Lord and his strength, and the great works of wonder which he has done.
He put up a witness in Jacob, and made a law in Israel; which he gave to our fathers so that they might give knowledge of them to their children;
So that the generation to come might have knowledge of them, even the children of the future, who would give word of them to their children;
So that they might put their hope in God, and not let God's works go out of their minds, but keep his laws;
And not be like their fathers, a stiff-necked and uncontrolled generation; a generation whose heart was hard, whose spirit was not true to God.
The children of Ephraim, armed with bows, were turned back on the day of the fight.
They were not ruled by God's word, and they would not go in the way of his law;
They let his works go out of their memory, and the wonders which he had made them see.
He did great works before the eyes of their fathers, in the land of Egypt, in the fields of Zoan.
The sea was cut in two so that they might go through; the waters were massed together on this side and on that.
In the daytime he was guiding them in the cloud, and all through the night with a light of fire.
The rocks of the waste land were broken by his power, and he gave them drink as out of the deep waters.
He made streams come out of the rock; and waters came flowing down like rivers.
And they went on sinning against him even more, turning away from the Most High in the waste land;
Testing God in their hearts, requesting meat for their desire.
They said bitter words against God, saying, Is God able to make ready a table in the waste land?
See, the rock was cut open by his power, so that the water came rushing out, and overflowing streams; is he able to give us bread? is he able to get meat for his people?
So these things came to the Lord's ears, and he was angry; and a fire was lighted against Jacob, and wrath came up against Israel;
Because they had no faith in God, and no hope in his salvation.
And he gave orders to the clouds on high, and the doors of heaven were open;
And he sent down manna like rain for their food, and gave them the grain of heaven.
Man took part in the food of strong ones; he sent them meat in full measure.
He sent an east wind from heaven, driving on the south wind by his power.
He sent down meat on them like dust, and feathered birds like the sand of the sea,
And he let it come down into their resting-place, round about their tents.
So they had food and were full; for he gave them their desire;
But they were not turned from their desires; and while the food was still in their mouths,
The wrath of God came on them, and put to death the fattest of them, and put an end to the young men of Israel.
For all this they went on sinning even more, and had no faith in his great wonders.
So their days were wasted like a breath, and their years in trouble.
When he sent death on them, then they made search for him; turning to him and looking for him with care;
In the memory that God was their Rock, and the Most High God their saviour.
But their lips were false to him, and their tongues were untrue to him;
And their hearts were not right with him, and they did not keep their agreement with him.
But he, being full of pity, has forgiveness for sin, and does not put an end to man: frequently turning back his wrath, and not being violently angry.
So he kept in mind that they were only flesh; a breath which is quickly gone, and will not come again.
How frequently did they go against him in the waste land, and give him cause for grief in the dry places!
Again they put God to the test, and gave pain to the Holy One of Israel.
They did not keep in mind the work of his hand, or the day when he took them from the power of their haters;
How he had done his signs in Egypt, and his wonders in the field of Zoan;
So that their rivers were turned to blood, and they were not able to get drink from their streams.
He sent different sorts of flies among them, poisoning their flesh; and frogs for their destruction.
He gave the increase of their fields to worms, the fruits of their industry to the locusts.
He sent ice for the destruction of their vines; their trees were damaged by the bitter cold.
Ice was rained down on their cattle; thunderstorms sent destruction among the flocks.
He sent on them the heat of his wrath, his bitter disgust, letting loose evil angels among them.
He let his wrath have its way; he did not keep back their soul from death, but gave their life to disease.
He gave to destruction all the first sons of Egypt; the first-fruits of their strength in the tents of Ham;
But he took his people out like sheep, guiding them in the waste land like a flock.
He took them on safely so that they had no fear; but their haters were covered by the sea.
And he was their guide to his holy land, even to the mountain, which his right hand had made his;
Driving out nations before them, marking out the line of their heritage, and giving the people of Israel their tents for a resting-place.
But they were bitter against the Most High God, testing him, and not keeping his laws;
Their hearts were turned back and untrue like their fathers; they were turned to one side like a twisted bow.
They made him angry with their high places; moving him to wrath with their images.
When this came to God's ears he was very angry, and gave up Israel completely;
So that he went away from the holy place in Shiloh, the tent which he had put among men;
And he let his strength be taken prisoner, and gave his glory into the hands of his hater.
He gave his people up to the sword, and was angry with his heritage.
Their young men were burned in the fire; and their virgins were not praised in the bride-song.
Their priests were put to death by the sword, and their widows made no weeping for them.
Then was the Lord like one awaking from sleep, and like a strong man crying out because of wine.
His haters were turned back by his blows and shamed for ever.
And he put the tent of Joseph on one side, and took not the tribe of Ephraim;
But he took the tribe of Judah for himself, and the mountain of Zion, in which he had pleasure.
And he made his holy place like the high heaven, like the earth which is fixed by him for ever.
He took David to be his servant, taking him from the place of the flocks;
From looking after the sheep which were giving milk, he took him to give food to Jacob his people, and to Israel his heritage.
So he gave them food with an upright heart, guiding them by the wisdom of his hands.A Psalm. Of Asaph.
O God, the nations have come into your heritage; they have made your holy Temple unclean; they have made Jerusalem a mass of broken walls.
They have given the bodies of your servants as food to the birds of the air, and the flesh of your saints to the beasts of the earth.
Their blood has been flowing like water round about Jerusalem; there was no one to put them in their last resting-place.
We are looked down on by our neighbours, we are laughed at and made sport of by those who are round us.
How long, O Lord? will you be angry for ever? will your wrath go on burning like fire?
Let your wrath be on the nations who have no knowledge of you, and on the kingdoms who have not made prayer to your name.
For they have taken Jacob for their meat, and made waste his house.
Do not keep in mind against us the sins of our fathers; let your mercy come to us quickly, for we have been made very low.
Give us help, O God of our salvation, for the glory of your name; take us out of danger and give us forgiveness for our sins, because of your name.
Why may the nations say, Where is their God? Let payment for the blood of your servants be made openly among the nations before our eyes.
Let the cry of the prisoner come before you; with your strong arm make free the children of death;
And give punishment seven times over into the breast of our neighbours for the bitter words which they have said against you, O Lord.
So we your people, and the sheep of your flock, will give you glory for ever: we will go on praising you through all generations.To the chief music-maker; put to Shoshannim-eduth. Of Asaph. A Psalm.
Give ear, O Keeper of Israel, guiding Joseph like a flock; you who have your seat on the winged ones, let your glory be seen.
Before Ephraim and Benjamin and Manasseh, let your strength be awake from sleep, and come as our salvation.
Take us back again, O God; let us see the shining of your face, and let us be safe.
O Lord God of armies, how long will your wrath be burning against the rest of your people?
You have given them the bread of weeping for food; for their drink you have given them sorrow in great measure.
You make us a cause of war among our neighbours; our haters are laughing at us among themselves.
Take us back again, O God of armies; let us see the shining of your face, and let us be safe.
You took a vine out of Egypt: driving out the nations, and planting it in their land.
You made ready a place for it, so that it might take deep root, and it sent out its branches over all the land.
The mountains were covered with its shade, and the great trees with its branches.
It sent out its arms to the Sea, and its branches to the River.
Why are its walls broken down by your hands, so that all who go by may take its fruit?
It is uprooted by the pigs from the woods, the beasts of the field get their food from it.
Come back, O God of armies: from heaven let your eyes be turned to this vine, and give your mind to it,
Even to the tree which was planted by your right hand, and to the branch which you made strong for yourself.
It is burned with fire; it is cut down: they are made waste by the wrath of your face.
Let your hand be on the man of your right hand, on the son of man whom you made strong for yourself.
So will we not be turned back from you; keep us in life, and we will give praise to your name.
Take us back, O Lord God of armies; let us see the shining of your face, and let us be safe.To the chief music-maker; put to the Gittith. Of Asaph.
Make a song to God our strength: make a glad cry to the God of Jacob.
Take up the melody, playing on an instrument of music, even on corded instruments.
Let the horn be sounded in the time of the new moon, at the full moon, on our holy feast-day:
For this is a rule for Israel, and a law of the God of Jacob.
He gave it to Joseph as a witness, when he went out over the land of Egypt; then the words of a strange tongue were sounding in my ears.
I took the weight from his back; his hands were made free from the baskets.
You gave a cry in your trouble, and I made you free; I gave you an answer in the secret place of the thunder; I put you to the test at the waters of Meribah. (Selah.)
Give ear, O my people, and I will give you my word, O Israel, if you will only do as I say!
There is to be no strange god among you; you are not to give worship to any other god.
I am the Lord your God, who took you up from the land of Egypt: let your mouth be open wide, so that I may give you food.
But my people did not give ear to my voice; Israel would have nothing to do with me.
So I gave them up to the desires of their hearts; that they might go after their evil purposes.
If only my people would give ear to me, walking in my ways!
I would quickly overcome their haters: my hand would be turned against those who make war on them.
The haters of the Lord would be broken, and their destruction would be eternal.
I would give them the best grain for food; you would be full of honey from the rock.A Psalm. Of Asaph.
God is in the meeting-place of God; he is judging among the gods.
How long will you go on judging falsely, having respect for the persons of evil-doers? (Selah.)
Give ear to the cause of the poor and the children without fathers; let those who are troubled and in need have their rights.
Be the saviour of the poor and those who have nothing: take them out of the hand of the evil-doers.
They have no knowledge or sense; they go about in the dark: all the bases of the earth are moved.
I said, You are gods; all of you are the sons of the Most High:
But you will come to death like men, falling like one of the rulers of the earth.
Up! O God, come as judge of the earth; for all the nations are your heritage.A Song. A Psalm. Of Asaph.
O God, do not keep quiet: let your lips be open and take no rest, O God.
For see! those who make war on you are out of control; your haters are lifting up their heads.
They have made wise designs against your people, talking together against those whom you keep in a secret place.
They have said, Come, let us put an end to them as a nation; so that the name of Israel may go out of man's memory.
For they have all come to an agreement; they are all joined together against you:
The tents of Edom and the Ishmaelites; Moab and the Hagarites;
Gebal and Ammon and Amalek; the Philistines and the people of Tyre;
Assur is joined with them; they have become the support of the children of Lot. (Selah.)
Do to them what you did to the Midianites; what you did to Sisera and Jabin, at the stream of Kishon:
Who came to destruction at En-dor; their bodies became dust and waste.
Make their chiefs like Oreb and Zeeb; and all their rulers like Zebah and Zalmunna:
Who have said, Let us take for our heritage the resting-place of God.
O my God, make them like the rolling dust; like dry stems before the wind.
As fire burning a wood, and as a flame causing fire on the mountains,
So go after them with your strong wind, and let them be full of fear because of your storm.
Let their faces be full of shame; so that they may give honour to your name, O Lord.
Let them be overcome and troubled for ever; let them be put to shame and come to destruction;
So that men may see that you only, whose name is Yahweh, are Most High over all the earth.To the chief music-maker; put to the Gittith A Psalm. Of the sons of Korah.
How dear are your tents, O Lord of armies!
The passion of my soul's desire is for the house of the Lord; my heart and my flesh are crying out for the living God.
The little birds have places for themselves, where they may put their young, even your altars, O Lord of armies, my King and my God.
Happy are they whose resting-place is in your house: they will still be praising you. (Selah.)
Happy is the man whose strength is in you; in whose heart are the highways to Zion.
Going through the valley of balsam-trees, they make it a place of springs; it is clothed with blessings by the early rain.
They go from strength to strength; every one of them comes before God in Zion.
O Lord God of armies, let my prayer come to you: give ear, O God of Jacob. (Selah.)
O God, let your eyes be on him who is our safe cover, and let your heart be turned to your king.
For a day in your house is better than a thousand. It is better to be a door-keeper in the house of my God, than to be living in the tents of sin.
The Lord God is our sun and our strength: the Lord will give grace and glory: he will not keep back any good thing from those whose ways are upright.
O Lord of armies, happy is the man whose hope is in you.To the chief music-maker. A Psalm. Of the sons of Korah.
Lord, you were good to your land: changing the fate of Jacob.
The wrongdoing of your people had forgiveness; all their sin had been covered. (Selah.)
You were no longer angry: you were turned from the heat of your wrath.
Come back to us, O God of our salvation, and be angry with us no longer.
Will you go on being angry with us for ever? will you keep your wrath against us through all the long generations?
Will you not give us life again, so that your people may be glad in you?
Let us see your mercy, O Lord, and give us your salvation.
I will give ear to the voice of the Lord; for he will say words of peace to his people and to his saints; but let them not go back to their foolish ways.
Truly, his salvation is near to his worshippers; so that glory may be in our land.
Mercy and faith have come together; righteousness and peace have given one another a kiss.
Faith comes up from the earth like a plant; righteousness is looking down from heaven.
The Lord will give what is good; and our land will give its increase.
Righteousness will go before him, making a way for his footsteps.A Prayer. Of David.
Let your ears be open to my voice, O Lord, and give me an answer; for I am poor and in need.
Keep my soul, for I am true to you; O my God, give salvation to your servant, whose hope is in you.
Have mercy on me, O Lord; for my cry goes up to you all the day.
Make glad the soul of your servant; for it is lifted up to you, O Lord.
You are good, O Lord, and full of forgiveness; your mercy is great to all who make their cry to you.
O Lord, give ear to my prayer; and take note of the sound of my requests.
In the day of my trouble I send up my cry to you; for you will give me an answer.
There is no god like you, O Lord; there are no works like your works.
Let all the nations whom you have made come and give worship to you, O Lord, giving glory to your name.
For you are great, and do great works of wonder; you only are God.
Make your way clear to me, O Lord; I will go on my way in your faith: let my heart be glad in the fear of your name.
I will give you praise, O Lord my God, with all my heart; I will give glory to your name for ever.
For your mercy to me is great; you have taken my soul up from the deep places of the underworld.
O God, men of pride have come up against me, and the army of violent men would take my life; they have not put you before them.
But you, O Lord, are a God full of pity and forgiveness, slow to get angry, great in mercy and wisdom.
O be turned to me and have mercy on me: give your strength to your servant, and your salvation to the son of her who is your servant.
Give me a sign for good; so that my haters may see it and be shamed; because you, Lord, have been my help and comfort.Of the sons of Korah. A Psalm. A Song.
This house is resting on the holy mountain.
The Lord has more love for the doors of Zion than for all the tents of Jacob.
Noble things are said of you, O town of God. (Selah.)
Rahab and Babylon will be named among those who have knowledge of me; see, Philistia and Tyre, with Ethiopia; this man had his birth there.
And of Zion it will be said, This or that man had his birth there; and the Most High will make her strong.
The Lord will keep in mind, when he is writing the records of the people, that this man had his birth there. (Selah.)
The players on instruments will be there, and the dancers will say, All my springs are in you.A Song. A Psalm. Of the sons of Korah. To the chief music-maker; put to Mahalath Leannoth. Maschil. Of Heman the Ezrahite.
O Lord, God of my salvation, I have been crying to you for help by day and by night:
Let my prayer come before you; give ear to my cry:
For my soul is full of evils, and my life has come near to the underworld.
I am numbered among those who go down into the earth; I have become like a man for whom there is no help:
My soul is among the dead, like those in the underworld, to whom you give no more thought; for they are cut off from your care.
You have put me in the lowest deep, even in dark places.
The weight of your wrath is crushing me, all your waves have overcome me. (Selah.)
You have sent my friends far away from me; you have made me a disgusting thing in their eyes: I am shut up, and not able to come out.
My eyes are wasting away because of my trouble: Lord, my cry has gone up to you every day, my hands are stretched out to you.
Will you do works of wonder for the dead? will the shades come back to give you praise? (Selah.)
Will the story of your mercy be given in the house of the dead? will news of your faith come to the place of destruction?
May there be knowledge of your wonders in the dark? or of your righteousness where memory is dead?
But to you did I send up my cry, O Lord; in the morning my prayer came before you.
Lord, why have you sent away my soul? why is your face covered from me?
I have been troubled and in fear of death from the time when I was young; your wrath is hard on me, and I have no strength.
The heat of your wrath has gone over me; I am broken by your cruel punishments.
They are round me all the day like water; they have made a circle about me.
You have sent my friends and lovers far from me; I am gone from the memory of those who are dear to me.Maschil. Of Ethan the Ezrahite.
My song will be of the mercies of the Lord for ever: with my mouth will I make his faith clear to all generations.
For you have said, Mercy will be made strong for ever; my faith will be unchanging in the heavens.
I have made an agreement with the man of my selection, I have made an oath to David my servant;
I will make your seed go on for ever, your kingdom will be strong through all generations. (Selah.)
In heaven let them give praise for your wonders, O Lord; and your unchanging faith among the saints.
For who is there in the heavens in comparison with the Lord? who is like the Lord among the sons of the gods?
God is greatly to be feared among the saints, and to be honoured over all those who are about him.
O Lord God of armies, who is strong like you, O Jah? and your unchanging faith is round about you.
You have rule over the sea in storm; when its waves are troubled, you make them calm.
Rahab was crushed by you like one wounded to death; with your strong arm you put to flight all your haters.
Yours are the heavens, and the earth is yours; you have made the world, and everything which is in it.
You have made the north and the south; Tabor and Hermon are sounding with joy at your name.
Yours is an arm of power; strong is your hand and high your right hand.
The seat of your kingdom is resting on righteousness and right judging: mercy and good faith come before your face.
Happy are the people who have knowledge of the holy cry: the light of your face, O Lord, will be shining on their way.
In your name will they have joy all the day: in your righteousness will they be lifted up.
For you are the glory of their strength; in your pleasure will our horn be lifted up.
For our breastplate is the Lord; and our king is the Holy One of Israel's.
Then your voice came to your holy one in a vision, saying, I have put the crown on a strong one, lifting up one taken from among the people.
I have made discovery of David my servant; I have put my holy oil on his head.
My hand will be his support; my arm will give him strength.
The deceit of those who are against him will not overcome him; he will not be troubled by the sons of evil.
I will have those who are against him broken before his face, and his haters will be crushed under my blows.
But my faith and my mercy will be with him; and in my name will his horn be lifted up.
I will put his hand in the sea, and his right hand in the rivers.
He will say to me, You are my father, my God, and the Rock of my salvation.
And I will make him the first of my sons, most high over the kings of the earth.
I will keep my mercy for him for ever; my agreement with him will not be changed.
His seed will keep their place for ever; his kingdom will be eternal, like the heavens.
If his children give up my law, and are not ruled by my decisions;
If my rules are broken, and my orders are not kept;
Then I will send punishment on them for their sin; my rod will be the reward of their evil-doing.
But I will not take away my mercy from him, and will not be false to my faith.
I will be true to my agreement; the things which have gone out of my lips will not be changed.
I have made an oath once by my holy name, that I will not be false to David.
His seed will not come to an end for ever; the seat of his kingdom will be like the sun before me.
It will be fixed for ever like the moon; and the witness in heaven is true. (Selah.)
But you have put him away in disgust; you have been angry with the king of your selection.
You have made your agreement with your servant of no effect: you have had no respect for his crown, it has come down even to the earth.
All his walls are broken down; you have given his strong towers to destruction.
All those who come by take away his goods; he is laughed at by his neighbours.
You have given power to the right hand of his haters; you have made glad all those who are against him.
His sword is turned back; you have not been his support in the fight.
You have put an end to his glory: the seat of his kingdom has been levelled to the earth.
You have made him old before his time; he is covered with shame. (Selah.)
How long, O Lord, will you Keep yourself for ever from our eyes? how long will your wrath be burning like fire?
See how short my time is; why have you made all men for no purpose?
What man now living will not see death? will he be able to keep back his soul from the underworld? (Selah.)
Lord, where are your earlier mercies? where is the oath which you made to David in unchanging faith?
Keep in mind, O Lord, the shame of your servants, and how the bitter words of all the people have come into my heart;
The bitter words of your haters, O Lord, shaming the footsteps of your king.
Let the Lord be praised for ever. So be it, So be it.A Prayer of Moses, the man of God.
Lord, you have been our resting-place in all generations.
Before the mountains were made, before you had given birth to the earth and the world, before time was, and for ever, you are God.
You send man back to his dust; and say, Go back, you children of men.
For to you a thousand years are no more than yesterday when it is past, and like a watch in the night.
...
In the morning it is green; in the evening it is cut down, and becomes dry.
We are burned up by the heat of your passion, and troubled by your wrath.
You have put our evil doings before you, our secret sins in the light of your face.
For all our days have gone by in your wrath; our years come to an end like a breath.
The measure of our life is seventy years; and if through strength it may be eighty years, its pride is only trouble and sorrow, for it comes to an end and we are quickly gone.
Who has knowledge of the power of your wrath, or who takes note of the weight of your passion?
So give us knowledge of the number of our days, that we may get a heart of wisdom.
Come back, O Lord; how long? let your purpose for your servants be changed.
In the morning give us your mercy in full measure; so that we may have joy and delight all our days.
Make us glad in reward for the days of our sorrow, and for the years in which we have seen evil.
Make your work clear to your servants, and your glory to their children.
Let the pleasure of the Lord our God be on us: O Lord, give strength to the work of our hands.Happy is he whose resting-place is in the secret of the Lord, and under the shade of the wings of the Most High;
Who says of the Lord, He is my safe place and my tower of strength: he is my God, in whom is my hope.
He will take you out of the bird-net, and keep you safe from wasting disease.
You will be covered by his feathers; under his wings you will be safe: his good faith will be your salvation.
You will have no fear of the evil things of the night, or of the arrow in flight by day,
Or of the disease which takes men in the dark, or of the destruction which makes waste when the sun is high.
You will see a thousand falling by your side, and ten thousand at your right hand; but it will not come near you.
Only with your eyes will you see the reward of the evil-doers.
Because you have said, I am in the hands of the Lord, the Most High is my safe resting- place;
No evil will come on you, and no disease will come near your tent.
For he will give you into the care of his angels to keep you wherever you go.
In their hands they will keep you up, so that your foot may not be crushed against a stone.
You will put your foot on the lion and the snake; the young lion and the great snake will be crushed under your feet.
Because he has given me his love, I will take him out of danger: I will put him in a place of honour, because he has kept my name in his heart.
When his cry comes up to me, I will give him an answer: I will be with him in trouble; I will make him free from danger and give him honour.
With long life will he be rewarded; and I will let him see my salvation.A Psalm. A Song for the Sabbath.
It is a good thing to give praise to the Lord, and to make melody to your name, O Most High;
To make clear your mercy in the morning, and your unchanging faith every night;
On a ten-corded instrument, and on an instrument of music with a quiet sound.
For you, O Lord, have made me glad through your work; I will have joy in the works of your hands.
O Lord, how great are your works! and your thoughts are very deep.
A man without sense has no knowledge of this; and a foolish man may not take it in.
When the sinners come up like the grass, and all the workers of evil do well for themselves, it is so that their end may be eternal destruction.
But you, O Lord, are on high for ever.
For see! your haters, O Lord, will be put to death; all the workers of evil will be put to flight;
But my horn is lifted up like the horn of the ox: the best oil is flowing on my head.
My eyes have seen trouble come on my haters; my ears have news of the fate of the evil-doers who have come up against me.
The good man will be like a tall tree in his strength; his growth will be as the wide- stretching trees of Lebanon.
Those who are planted in the house of the Lord will come up tall and strong in his gardens.
They will give fruit even when they are old; they will be fertile and full of growth;
For a sign that the Lord is upright; he is my Rock, there is no deceit in him.The Lord is King; he is clothed with glory; the Lord is clothed with strength; power is the cord of his robe; the world is fixed, so that it may not be moved.
The seat of your power has been from the past; you are eternal.
The rivers send up, O Lord, the rivers send up their voices; they send them up with a loud cry.
The Lord in heaven is stronger than the noise of great waters, yes, he is stronger than the great waves of the sea.
Your witness is most certain; it is right for your house to be holy, O Lord, for ever.O God, in whose hands is punishment, O God of punishment, let your shining face be seen.
Be lifted up, O judge of the earth; let their reward come to the men of pride.
How long will sinners, O Lord, how long will sinners have joy over us?
Words of pride come from their lips; all the workers of evil say great things of themselves.
Your people are crushed by them, O Lord, your heritage is troubled,
They put to death the widow and the guest, they take the lives of children who have no father;
And they say, Jah will not see it, the God of Jacob will not give thought to it.
Give your mind to my words, you who are without wisdom among the people; you foolish men, when will you be wise?
Has he by whom your ears were planted no hearing? or is he blind by whom your eyes were formed?
He who is the judge of the nations, will he not give men the reward of their acts, even he who gives knowledge to man?
The Lord has knowledge of the thoughts of man, for they are only a breath.
Happy is the man who is guided by you, O Jah, and to whom you give teaching out of your law;
So that you may give him rest from the days of evil, till a hole is made ready for the destruction of the sinners.
The Lord will not give up his people, or take away his support from his heritage;
But decisions will again be made in righteousness; and they will be kept by all whose hearts are true.
Who will give me help against the sinners? and who will be my support against the workers of evil?
If the Lord had not been my helper, my soul would quickly have gone down into death.
If I say, My foot is slipping; your mercy, O Lord, is my support.
Among all my troubled thoughts, your comforts are the delight of my soul.
What part with you has the seat of sin, which makes evil into a law?
They are banded together against the soul of the upright, to give decisions against those who have done no wrong.
But the Lord is my safe resting-place; my God is the Rock where I am safe.
And he has made their evil designs come back on themselves, cutting them off in their sin; the Lord our God will put an end to them.O come, let us make songs to the Lord; sending up glad voices to the Rock of our salvation.
Let us come before his face with praises; and make melody with holy songs.
For the Lord is a great God, and a great King over all gods.
The deep places of the earth are in his hand; and the tops of the mountains are his.
The sea is his, and he made it; and the dry land was formed by his hands.
O come, let us give worship, falling down on our knees before the Lord our Maker.
For he is our God; and we are the people to whom he gives food, and the sheep of his flock. Today, if you would only give ear to his voice!
Let not your hearts be hard, as at Meribah, as in the day of Massah in the waste land;
When your fathers put me to the test and saw my power and my work.
For forty years I was angry with this generation, and said, They are a people whose hearts are turned away from me, for they have no knowledge of my ways;
And I made an oath in my wrath, that they might not come into my place of rest.O make a new song to the Lord; let all the earth make melody to the Lord.
Make songs to the Lord, blessing his name; give the good news of his salvation day by day.
Make clear his glory to the nations, and his wonders to all the peoples.
For the Lord is great, and greatly to be praised; he is more to be feared than all other gods.
For all the gods of the nations are false gods; but the Lord made the heavens.
Honour and glory are before him: strong and fair is his holy place.
Give to the Lord, O you families of the peoples, give to the Lord glory and strength.
Give to the Lord the glory of his name; take with you an offering and come into his house.
O give worship to the Lord in holy robes; be in fear before him, all the earth.
Say among the nations, The Lord is King; yes, the world is ordered so that it may not be moved; he will be an upright judge of the peoples.
Let the heavens have joy and the earth be glad; let the sea be thundering with all its waters;
Let the field be glad, and everything which is in it; yes, let all the trees of the wood be sounding with joy,
Before the Lord, for he is come; he is come to be the judge of the earth; the earth will be judged in righteousness, and the peoples with unchanging faith.The Lord is King, let the earth have joy; let all the sea-lands be glad.
Dark clouds are round him; his kingdom is based on righteousness and right judging.
Fire goes before him, burning up all those who are against him round about.
His bright flames give light to the world; the earth saw it with fear.
The mountains became like wax at the coming of the Lord, at the coming of the Lord of all the earth.
The heavens gave out the news of his righteousness, and all the people saw his glory.
Shamed be all those who give worship to images, and take pride in false gods; give him worship, all you gods.
Zion gave ear and was glad; and the daughters of Judah were full of joy, because of your decisions, O Lord.
For you, Lord, are most high over the earth; you are lifted up over all other gods.
You who are lovers of the Lord, be haters of evil; he keeps the souls of his saints; he takes them out of the hand of sinners.
Light is shining on the lovers of righteousness, and for the upright in heart there is joy.
Be glad in the Lord, you upright men; praising the memory of his holy name.The Lord is King; let the peoples be in fear: his seat is on the winged ones; let the earth be moved.
The Lord is great in Zion; he is high over all the nations.
Let them give praise to your name, for it is great and to be feared; holy is he.
The king's power is used for righteousness; you give true decisions, judging rightly in the land of Jacob.
Give high honour to the Lord our God, worshipping at his feet; holy is he.
Moses and Aaron among his priests, and Samuel among those who gave honour to his name; they made prayers to the Lord, and he gave answers to them.
His voice came to them from the pillar of cloud; they kept his witness, and the law which he gave them.
You gave them an answer, O Lord our God; you took away their sin, though you gave them punishment for their wrongdoing.
Give high honour to the Lord our God, worshipping with your faces turned to his holy hill; for the Lord our God is holy.A Psalm. Of David.
I will make a song of mercy and righteousness; to you, O Lord, will I make melody.
I will do wisely in the way of righteousness: O when will you come to me? I will be walking in my house with a true heart.
I will not put any evil thing before my eyes; I am against all turning to one side; I will not have it near me.
The false heart I will send away from me: I will not have an evil-doer for a friend.
I will put to death anyone who says evil of his neighbour secretly; the man with a high look and a heart of pride is disgusting to me.
My eyes will be on those of good faith in the land, so that they may be living in my house; he who is walking in the right way will be my servant.
The worker of deceit will not come into my house; the false man will have no place before my eyes.
Morning by morning will I put to death all the sinners in the land, so that all evil-doers may be cut off from Jerusalem.Of David.
Give praise to the Lord, O my soul; let everything in me give praise to his holy name.
Give praise to the Lord, O my soul; let not all his blessings go from your memory.
He has forgiveness for all your sins; he takes away all your diseases;
He keeps back your life from destruction, crowning you with mercy and grace.
He makes your mouth full of good things, so that your strength is made new again like the eagle's.
The Lord gives decisions in righteousness for all who are in trouble.
He gave knowledge of his way to Moses, and made his acts clear to the children of Israel.
The Lord is kind and full of pity, not quickly made angry, but ever ready to have mercy.
His feeling will no longer be bitter; he will not keep his wrath for ever.
He has not given us the punishment for our sins, or the reward of our wrongdoing.
For as the heaven is high over the earth, so great is his mercy to his worshippers.
As far as the east is from the west, so far has he put our sins from us.
As a father has pity on his children, so the Lord has pity on his worshippers.
For he has knowledge of our feeble frame; he sees that we are only dust.
As for man, his days are as grass: his beautiful growth is like the flower of the field.
The wind goes over it and it is gone; and its place sees it no longer.
But the mercy of the Lord is eternal for his worshippers, and their children's children will see his righteousness;
If they keep his agreement, and have his laws in mind to do them.
The Lord has made ready his high seat in the heavens; his kingdom is ruling over all.
Give praise to the Lord, you his angels, who are great in strength, doing his orders, and waiting for his voice.
Give praise to the Lord, all you his armies; and you his servants who do his pleasure.
Give praise to the Lord, all his works, in all places under his rule: give praise to the Lord, O my soul.Give praise to the Lord, O my soul. O Lord my God, you are very great; you are robed with honour and power.
You are clothed with light as with a robe; stretching out the heavens like a curtain:
The arch of your house is based on the waters; you make the clouds your carriage; you go on the wings of the wind:
He makes winds his angels, and flames of fire his servants.
He has made the earth strong on its bases, so that it may not be moved for ever and ever;
Covering it with the sea as with a robe: the waters were high over the mountains;
At the voice of your word they went in flight; at the sound of your thunder they went away in fear;
The mountains came up and the valleys went down into the place which you had made ready for them.
You made a limit over which they might not go, so that the earth would never again be covered by them.
You sent the springs into the valleys; they are flowing between the hills.
They give drink to every beast of the field; the mountain asses come to them for water.
The birds of the air have their resting-places by them, and make their song among the branches.
He sends down rain from his store-houses on the hills: the earth is full of the fruit of his works.
He makes the grass come up for the cattle, and plants for the use of man; so that bread may come out of the earth;
And wine to make glad the heart of man, and oil to make his face shining, and bread giving strength to his heart.
The trees of the Lord are full of growth, the cedars of Lebanon of his planting;
Where the birds have their resting-places; as for the stork, the tall trees are her house.
The high hills are a safe place for the mountain goats, and the rocks for the small beasts.
He made the moon for a sign of the divisions of the year; teaching the sun the time of its going down.
When you make it dark, it is night, when all the beasts of the woods come quietly out of their secret places.
The young lions go thundering after their food; searching for their meat from God.
The sun comes up, and they come together, and go back to their secret places to take their rest.
Man goes out to his work, and to his business, till the evening.
O Lord, how great is the number of your works! in wisdom you have made them all; the earth is full of the things you have made.
There is the great, wide sea, where there are living things, great and small, more than may be numbered.
There go the ships; there is that great beast, which you have made as a plaything.
All of them are waiting for you, to give them their food in its time.
They take what you give them; they are full of the good things which come from your open hand.
If your face is veiled, they are troubled; when you take away their breath, they come to an end, and go back to the dust.
If you send out your spirit, they are given life; you make new the face of the earth.
Let the glory of the Lord be for ever; let the Lord have joy in his works:
At whose look the earth is shaking; at whose touch the mountains send out smoke.
I will make songs to the Lord all my life; I will make melody to my God while I have my being.
Let my thoughts be sweet to him: I will be glad in the Lord.
Let sinners be cut off from the earth, and let all evil-doers come to an end. Give praise to the Lord, O my soul. Give praise to the Lord.O give praise to the Lord; give honour to his name, talking of his doings among the peoples.
Let your voice be sounding in songs and melody; let all your thoughts be of the wonder of his works.
Have glory in his holy name; let the hearts of those who are searching after the Lord be glad.
Let your search be for the Lord and for his strength; let your hearts ever be turned to him.
Keep in mind the great works which he has done; his wonders, and the decisions of his mouth;
O you seed of Abraham, his servant, you children of Jacob, his loved ones.
He is the Lord our God: he is judge of all the earth.
He has kept his agreement in mind for ever, the word which he gave for a thousand generations;
The agreement which he made with Abraham, and his oath to Isaac;
And he gave it to Jacob for a law, and to Israel for an eternal agreement;
Saying, To you will I give the land of Canaan, the measured line of your heritage:
When they were still small in number, and strange in the land;
When they went about from one nation to another, and from one kingdom to another people.
He would not let anyone do them wrong; he even kept back kings because of them,
Saying, Put not your hand on those who have been marked with my holy oil, and do my prophets no wrong.
And he took away all food from the land, so that the people were without bread.
He sent a man before them, even Joseph, who was given as a servant for a price:
His feet were fixed in chains; his neck was put in iron bands;
Till the time when his word came true; he was tested by the word of the Lord.
The king sent men to take off his chains; even the ruler of the people, who let him go free.
He made him lord of his house, and ruler over everything he had;
To give his chiefs teaching at his pleasure, and so that his law-givers might get wisdom from him.
Then Israel came into Egypt, and Jacob was living in the land of Ham.
And his people were greatly increased, and became stronger than those who were against them.
Their hearts were turned to hate against his people, so that they made secret designs against them.
He sent Moses, his servant, and Aaron, the man of his selection.
He let his signs be seen among the people, and his wonders in the land of Ham.
He sent black night and made it dark; and they did not go against his word.
At his word their waters were turned to blood, and he sent death on all their fish.
Their land was full of frogs, even in the rooms of the king.
He gave the word, and there came the dog-fly, and insects over all the land.
He gave them ice for rain, and flaming fire in their land.
He gave their vines and their fig-trees to destruction, and the trees of their land were broken down.
At his word the locusts came, and young locusts more than might be numbered,
And put an end to all the plants of their land, taking all the fruit of the earth for food.
He put to death the first child of every family in the land, the first-fruits of their strength.
He took his people out with silver and gold: there was not one feeble person among them.
Egypt was glad when they went; for the fear of them had come down on them.
A cloud was stretched over them for a cover; and he sent fire to give light in the night.
At the people's request he sent birds, and gave them the bread of heaven for food.
His hand made the rock open, and the waters came streaming out; they went down through the dry places like a river.
For he kept in mind his holy word, and Abraham, his servant.
And he took his people out with joy, the men of his selection with glad cries:
And gave them the lands of the nations; and they took the work of the peoples for a heritage;
So that they might keep his orders, and be true to his laws. Give praise to the Lord.Let the Lord be praised. O give praise to the Lord, for he is good: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
Who is able to give an account of the great acts of the Lord, or to make clear all his praise?
Happy are they whose decisions are upright, and he who does righteousness at all times.
Keep me in mind, O Lord, when you are good to your people; O let your salvation come to me;
So that I may see the well-being of the people of your selection, and have a part in the joy of your nation, and take pride in your heritage.
We are sinners like our fathers, we have done wrong, our acts are evil.
Our fathers did not give thought to your wonders in Egypt; they did not keep in memory the great number of your mercies, but gave you cause for wrath at the sea, even at the Red Sea.
But he was their saviour because of his name, so that men might see his great power.
By his word the Red Sea was made dry: and he took them through the deep waters as through the waste land.
And he took them safely out of the hands of their haters, and kept them from the attacks of those who were against them.
And the waters went over their haters; all of them came to an end.
Then they had faith in his words; they gave him songs of praise.
But their memory of his works was short; not waiting to be guided by him,
They gave way to their evil desires in the waste land, and put God to the test in the dry places.
And he gave them their request, but sent a wasting disease into their souls.
They were full of envy against Moses among the tents, and against Aaron, the holy one of the Lord.
The earth opening put an end to Dathan, covering up Abiram and his band.
And a fire was lighted among their tents; the sinners were burned up by the flames.
They made a young ox in Horeb, and gave worship to an image of gold.
And their glory was changed into the image of an ox, whose food is grass.
They had no memory of God their saviour, who had done great things in Egypt;
Works of wonder in the land of Ham, and things of fear by the Red Sea.
And he was purposing to put an end to them if Moses, his special servant, had not gone up before him, between him and his people, turning back his wrath, to keep them from destruction.
They were disgusted with the good land; they had no belief in his word;
Talking against him secretly in their tents, they did not give ear to the voice of the Lord.
So he made an oath against them, to put an end to them in the waste land:
That their children might be mixed among the nations, and sent away into other lands.
And they were joined to Baal-peor, and took part in the offerings to the dead.
So they made him angry by their behaviour; and he sent disease on them.
Then Phinehas got up, and made prayer for them; and the disease went no farther.
And all the generations coming after him kept the memory of his righteousness for ever.
They made God angry again at the waters of Meribah, so that Moses was troubled because of them;
For they made his spirit bitter, and he said unwise things.
They did not put an end to the peoples, as the Lord had said;
But they were joined to the nations, learning their works.
And they gave worship to images; which were a danger to them:
They even made offerings of their sons and their daughters to evil spirits,
And gave the blood of their sons and their daughters who had done no wrong, offering them to the images of Canaan; and the land was made unclean with blood.
So they became unclean through their works, going after their evil desires.
Then the wrath of the Lord was burning against his people, and he was angry with his heritage.
And he gave them into the hands of the nations; and they were ruled by their haters.
By them they were crushed, and made low under their hands.
Again and again he made them free; but their hearts were turned against his purpose, and they were overcome by their sins.
But when their cry came to his ears, he had pity on their trouble:
And kept in mind his agreement with them, and in his great mercy gave them forgiveness.
He put pity into the hearts of those who made them prisoners.
Be our saviour, O Lord our God, and let us come back together from among the nations, so that we may give honour to your holy name, and have glory in your praise.
Praise be to the Lord God of Israel for ever and for ever; and let all the people say, So be it. Give praise to the Lord.O give praise to the Lord, for he is good: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
Let those whose cause the Lord has taken up say so, his people whom he has taken out of the hands of their haters;
Making them come together out of all the lands, from the east and from the west, from the north and from the south.
They were wandering in the waste places; they saw no way to a resting-place.
Their souls became feeble for need of food and drink.
Then they sent up their cry to the Lord in their sorrow, and he gave them salvation out of all their troubles;
Guiding them in the right way, so that they might come into the town of their resting- place.
Let men give praise to the Lord for his mercy, and for the wonders which he does for the children of men!
He gives its desire to the unresting soul, so that it is full of good things.
Those who were in the dark, in the black night, in chains of sorrow and iron;
Because they went against the words of God, and gave no thought to the laws of the Most High:
So that he made their hearts weighted down with grief; they were falling, and had no helper.
Then they sent up their cry to the Lord in their sorrow, and he gave them salvation out of all their troubles.
He took them out of the dark and the black night, and all their chains were broken.
Let men give praise to the Lord for his mercy, and for the wonders which he does for the children of men!
The doors of brass are broken by his arm, and the bands of iron are cut in two.
Foolish men, because of their sins, and because of their wrongdoing, are troubled;
They are disgusted by all food, and they come near to the doors of death.
Then they send up their cry to the Lord in their sorrow, and he gives them salvation out of all their troubles.
He sent his word and made them well, and kept them safe from the underworld.
Let men give praise to the Lord for his mercy, and for the wonders which he does for the children of men!
Let them make offerings of praise, giving news of his works with cries of joy.
Those who go down to the sea in ships, who do business in the great waters;
They see the works of the Lord, and his wonders in the deep.
For at his word comes up the storm-wind, lifting high the waves.
The sailors go up to heaven, and down into the deep; their souls are wasted because of their trouble.
They are turned here and there, rolling like a man who is full of wine; and all their wisdom comes to nothing.
Then they send up their cry to the Lord in their sorrow, and he gives them salvation out of all their troubles.
He makes the storm into a calm, so that the waves are at peace.
Then they are glad, because the sea is quiet, and he takes them to the harbour of their desire.
Let men give praise to the Lord for his mercy, and for the wonders which he does for the children of men!
Let them give glory to him in the meeting of the people, and praise among the chiefs.
He makes rivers into waste places, and springs of water into a dry land;
He makes a fertile country into a salt waste, because of the sins of those who are living there.
He makes a waste land into a place of water, and a dry land into water-springs.
And there he gives the poor a resting-place, so that they may make themselves a town;
And put seed in the fields and make vine-gardens, to give them fruit.
He gives them his blessing so that they are increased greatly, and their cattle do not become less.
And when they are made low, and crushed by trouble and sorrow,
He puts an end to the pride of kings, and sends them wandering in the waste lands where there is no way.
But he puts the poor man on high from his troubles, and gives him families like a flock.
The upright see it and are glad: the mouth of the sinner is stopped.
Let the wise give thought to these things, and see the mercies of the Lord.A Song. A Psalm. Of David.
O God, my heart is fixed; I will make songs and melody, even with my glory.
Give out your sounds, O corded instruments: the dawn will be awaking with my song.
I will give you praise, O Lord, among the peoples; I will make melody to you among the nations.
For your mercy is higher than the heavens: and your unchanging faith than the clouds.
Be lifted up, O God, higher than the heavens; let your glory be over all the earth.
Let your right hand be stretched out for salvation, and give me an answer, so that your loved ones may be safe from danger.
This is the word of the holy God: I will be glad; I will make Shechem a heritage, measuring out the valley of Succoth.
Gilead is mine; Manasseh is mine; Ephraim is the strength of my head; Judah is my law-giver;
Moab is my washpot; on Edom is the resting-place of my shoe; over Philistia will I send out a glad cry.
Who will take me into the strong town? who will be my guide into Edom?
Have you not sent us away from you, O God? and you go not out with our armies.
Give us help in our trouble; for there is no help in man.
With God we will do great things; for by him will our haters be crushed underfoot.To the chief music-maker. Of David. A Psalm.
God of my praise, let my prayer be answered;
For the mouth of the sinner is open against me in deceit: his tongue has said false things against me.
Words of hate are round about me; they have made war against me without cause.
For my love they give me back hate; but I have given myself to prayer.
They have put on me evil for good; hate in exchange for my love.
Put an evil man over him; and let one be placed at his right hand to say evil of him.
When he is judged, let the decision go against him; and may his prayer become sin.
Let his life be short; let another take his position of authority.
Let his children have no father, and his wife be made a widow.
Let his children be wanderers, looking to others for their food; let them be sent away from the company of their friends.
Let his creditor take all his goods; and let others have the profit of his work.
Let no man have pity on him, or give help to his children when he is dead.
Let his seed be cut off; in the coming generation let their name go out of memory.
Let the Lord keep in mind the wrongdoing of his fathers; and may the sin of his mother have no forgiveness.
Let them be ever before the eyes of the Lord, so that the memory of them may be cut off from the earth.
Because he had no mercy, but was cruel to the low and the poor, designing the death of the broken-hearted.
As he took pleasure in cursing, so let it come on him; and as he had no delight in blessing, let it be far from him.
He put on cursing like a robe, and it has come into his body like water, and into his bones like oil.
Let it be to him as a robe which he puts on, let it be like a band which is round him at all times.
Let this be the reward given to my haters from the Lord, and to those who say evil of my soul.
But, O Lord God, give me your help, because of your name; take me out of danger, because your mercy is good.
For I am poor and in need, and my heart is wounded in me.
I am gone like the shade when it is stretched out: I am forced out of my place like a locust.
My knees are feeble for need of food; there is no fat on my bones.
As for me, they make sport of me; shaking their heads when they see me.
Give me help, O Lord my God; in your mercy be my saviour;
So that they may see that it is the work of your hand; that you, Lord, have done it.
They may give curses but you give blessing; when they come up against me, put them to shame; but let your servant be glad.
Let my haters be clothed with shame, covering themselves with shame as with a robe.
I will give the Lord great praise with my mouth; yes, I will give praise to him among all the people.
For he is ever at the right hand of the poor, to take him out of the hands of those who go after his soul.A Psalm. Of David.
The Lord said to my lord, Be seated at my right hand, till I put all those who are against you under your feet.
The Lord will send out the rod of your strength from Zion; be king over your haters.
Your people give themselves gladly in the day of your power; like the dew of the morning on the holy mountains is the army of your young men.
The Lord has made an oath, and will not take it back. You are a priest for ever, after the order of Melchizedek.
In the day of his wrath kings will be wounded by the Lord at your right hand.
He will be judge among the nations, the valleys will be full of dead bodies; the head over a great country will be wounded by him.
He will take of the stream by the way; so his head will be lifted up.Let the Lord be praised. I will give praise to the Lord with all my heart, among the upright, and in the meeting of the people.
The works of the Lord are great, searched out by all those who have delight in them.
His work is full of honour and glory; and his righteousness is unchanging for ever.
Certain for ever is the memory of his wonders: the Lord is full of pity and mercy.
He has given food to his worshippers; he will keep his agreement in mind for ever.
He has made clear to his people the power of his works, giving them the heritage of the nations.
The works of his hands are faith and righteousness; all his laws are unchanging.
They are fixed for ever and ever, they are done in faith and righteousness.
He has sent salvation to his people; he has given his word for ever: holy is his name and greatly to be feared.
The fear of the Lord is the best part of wisdom: all those who keep his laws are wise: his praise is eternal.Let the Lord be praised. Happy is the man who gives honour to the Lord, and has great delight in his laws.
His seed will be strong on the earth; blessings will be on the generation of the upright.
A store of wealth will be in his house, and his righteousness will be for ever.
For the upright there is a light shining in the dark; he is full of grace and pity.
All is well for the man who is kind and gives freely to others; he will make good his cause when he is judged.
He will not ever be moved; the memory of the upright will be living for ever.
He will have no fear of evil news; his heart is fixed, for his hope is in the Lord.
His heart is resting safely, he will have no fear, till he sees trouble come on his haters.
He has given with open hands to the poor; his righteousness is for ever; his horn will be lifted up with honour.
The sinner will see it with grief; he will be wasted away with envy; the desire of the evil-doers will come to nothing.Let the Lord be praised. O you servants of the Lord, give praise to the name of the Lord.
Let blessing be on the name of the Lord, from this time and for ever.
From the coming up of the sun to its going down, the Lord's name is to be praised.
The Lord is high over all nations, and his glory is higher than the heavens.
Who is like the Lord our God, who is seated on high,
Looking down on the heavens, and on the earth?
He takes the poor man out of the dust, lifting him up from his low position;
To give him a place among the rulers, even with the rulers of his people.
He gives the unfertile woman a family, making her a happy mother of children. Give praise to the Lord.When Israel came out of Egypt, the children of Jacob from a people whose language was strange to them;
Judah became his holy place, and Israel his kingdom.
The sea saw it, and went in flight; Jordan was turned back.
The mountains were jumping like goats, and the little hills like lambs.
What was wrong with you, O sea, that you went in flight? O Jordan, that you were turned back?
You mountains, why were you jumping like goats, and you little hills like lambs?
Be troubled, O earth, before the Lord, before the God of Jacob;
Who made the rock into a water-spring, and the hard stone into a fountain.Not to us, O Lord, not to us, but to your name let glory be given, because of your mercy and your unchanging faith.
Why may the nations say, Where is now their God?
But our God is in heaven: he has done whatever was pleasing to him.
Their images are silver and gold, the work of men's hands.
They have mouths, but no voice; they have eyes, but they see not;
They have ears, but no hearing; they have noses, but no sense of smell;
They have hands without feeling, and feet without power of walking; and no sound comes from their throat.
Those who make them are like them; and so is everyone who puts his faith in them.
O Israel, have faith in the Lord: he is their help and their breastplate.
O house of Aaron, have faith in the Lord: he is their help and their breastplate.
You worshippers of the Lord, have faith in the Lord: he is their help and their breastplate.
The Lord has kept us in mind and will give us his blessing; he will send blessings on the house of Israel and on the house of Aaron.
He will send blessings on the worshippers of the Lord, on the small and on the great.
May the Lord give you and your children still greater increase.
May you have the blessing of the Lord, who made heaven and earth.
The heavens are the Lord's; but the earth he has given to the children of men.
The dead do not give praise to the Lord; or those who go down to the underworld.
But we will give praise to the Lord now and for ever. Praise be to the Lord.I have given my love to the Lord, because he has given ear to the voice of my cry and my prayer.
He has let my request come before him, and I will make my prayer to him all my days.
The nets of death were round me, and the pains of the underworld had me in their grip; I was full of trouble and sorrow.
Then I made my prayer to the Lord, saying, O Lord, take my soul out of trouble.
The Lord is full of grace and righteousness; truly, he is a God of mercy.
The Lord keeps the simple; I was made low, and he was my saviour.
Come back to your rest, O my soul; for the Lord has given you your reward.
You have taken my soul from the power of death, keeping my eyes from weeping, and my feet from falling.
I will go before the Lord in the land of the living.
I still had faith, though I said, I am in great trouble;
Though I said in my fear, All men are false.
What may I give to the Lord for all the good things which he has done for me?
I will take the cup of salvation, and give praise to the name of the Lord.
I will make the offering of my oath to the Lord, even before all his people.
Dear in the eyes of the Lord is the death of his saints.
O Lord, truly I am your servant; I am your servant, the son of her who is your servant; by you have my cords been broken.
I will give an offering of praise to you, and make my prayer in the name of the Lord.
I will make the offerings of my oath, even before all his people;
In the Lord's house, even in Jerusalem. Praise be to the Lord.Let all the nations give praise to the Lord: let all the people give him praise.
For great is his mercy to us, and his faith is unchanging for ever. Praise be to the Lord.O give praise to the Lord, for he is good: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
Let Israel now say, that his mercy is unchanging for ever.
Let the house of Aaron now say, that his mercy is unchanging for ever.
Let all worshippers of the Lord now say, that his mercy is unchanging for ever.
I made my prayer to the Lord in my trouble: and the Lord gave me an answer, and put me in a wide place.
The Lord is on my side; I will have no fear: what is man able to do to me?
The Lord is my great helper: I will see my desire against my haters.
It is better to have faith in the Lord than to put one's hope in man.
It is better to have faith in the Lord than to put one's hope in rulers.
All the nations have come round me; but in the name of the Lord I will have them cut down.
They are round me, yes, they are all about me; but in the name of the Lord I will have them cut down.
They are round me like bees; but they are put out like a fire among thorns; for in the name of the Lord I will have them cut down.
I have been hard pushed by you, so that I might have a fall: but the Lord was my helper.
The Lord is my strength and my song; he has become my salvation.
The sound of joy and salvation is in the tents of the upright; the right hand of the Lord does works of power.
The right hand of the Lord is lifted up; the right hand of the Lord does works of power.
Life and not death will be my part, and I will give out the story of the works of the Lord.
The hand of Jah has been hard on me; but he has not given me up to death.
Let the doors of righteousness be open to me; I will go in and give praise to the Lord.
This is the door of the Lord's house; the workers of righteousness will go in through it.
I will give you praise, for you have given me an answer, and have become my salvation.
The stone which the builders put on one side has become the chief stone of the building.
This is the Lord's doing; it is a wonder in our eyes.
This is the day which the Lord has made; we will be full of joy and delight in it.
Send salvation now, O Lord; Lord, send us your blessing.
A blessing be on him who comes in the name of the Lord; we give you blessing from the house of the Lord.
The Lord is God, and he has given us light; let the holy dance be ordered with branches, even up to the horns of the altar.
You are my God, and I will give you praise; my God, and I will give honour to your name.
O give praise to the Lord, for he is good: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.A Song of the going up.
In my trouble my cry went up to the Lord, and he gave me an answer.
O Lord, be the saviour of my soul from false lips, and from the tongue of deceit.
What punishment will he give you? what more will he do to you, you false tongue?
Sharp arrows of the strong, and burning fire.
Sorrow is mine because I am strange in Meshech, and living in the tents of Kedar.
My soul has long been living with the haters of peace.
I am for peace: but when I say so, they are for war.A Song of the going up.
My eyes are lifted up to the hills: O where will my help come from?
Your help comes from the Lord, who made heaven and earth.
May he not let your foot be moved: no need of sleep has he who keeps you.
See, the eyes of Israel's keeper will not be shut in sleep.
The Lord is your keeper; the Lord is your shade on your right hand.
You will not be touched by the sun in the day, or by the moon at night.
The Lord will keep you safe from all evil; he will take care of your soul.
The Lord will keep watch over your going out and your coming in, from this time and for ever.A Song of the going up. Of David.
I was glad because they said to me, We will go into the house of the Lord.
At last our feet were inside your doors, O Jerusalem.
O Jerusalem, you are like a town which is well joined together;
To which the tribes went up, even the tribes of the Lord, for a witness to Israel, to give praise to the name of the Lord.
For there seats for the judges were placed, even the rulers' seats of the line of David.
O make prayers for the peace of Jerusalem; may they whose love is given to you do well.
May peace be inside your walls, and wealth in your noble houses.
Because of my brothers and friends, I will now say, Let peace be with you.
Because of the house of the Lord our God, I will be working for your good.A Song of the going up.
To you my eyes are lifted up, even to you whose seat is in the heavens.
See! as the eyes of servants are turned to the hands of their masters, and the eyes of a servant-girl to her owner, so our eyes are waiting for the Lord our God, till he has mercy on us.
Have mercy on us, O Lord, have mercy on us: for all men are looking down on us.
For long enough have men of pride made sport of our soul.A Song of the going up. Of David.
If it had not been the Lord who was on our side (let Israel now say);
If it had not been the Lord who was on our side, when men came up against us;
They would have made a meal of us while still living, in the heat of their wrath against us:
We would have been covered by the waters; the streams would have gone over our soul;
Yes, the waters of pride would have gone over our soul.
Praise be to the Lord, who has not let us be wounded by their teeth.
Our soul has gone free like a bird out of the net of those who would take her: the net is broken, and we are free.
Our help is in the name of the Lord, the maker of heaven and earth.A Song of the going up.
Those whose hope is in the Lord are like the mountain of Zion, which may not be moved, but keeps its place for ever.
As the mountains are round about Jerusalem, so the Lord is round about his people, from this time and for ever.
For the rod of sinners will not be resting on the heritage of the upright; so that the upright may not put out their hands to evil.
Do good, O Lord, to those who are good, and to those who are upright in heart.
But as for such as are turned out of the straight way, the Lord will take them away with the workers of evil. Let peace be on Israel.A Song of the going up.
When the Lord made a change in Zion's fate, we were like men in a dream.
Then our mouths were full of laughing, and our tongues gave a glad cry; they said among the nations, The Lord has done great things for them.
The Lord has done great things for us; because of which we are glad.
Let our fate be changed, O Lord, like the streams in the South.
Those who put in seed with weeping will get in the grain with cries of joy.
Though a man may go out weeping, taking his vessel of seed with him; he will come again in joy, with the corded stems of grain in his arms.A Song of the going up. Of Solomon.
If the Lord is not helping the builders, then the building of a house is to no purpose: if the Lord does not keep the town, the watchman keeps his watch for nothing.
It is of no use for you to get up early, and to go late to your rest, with the bread of sorrow for your food; for the Lord gives to his loved ones in sleep.
See, sons are a heritage from the Lord; the fruit of the body is his reward.
Like arrows in the hand of a man of war, are the children of the young.
Happy is the man who has a good store of them; he will not be put to shame, but his cause will be supported by them against his haters.A Song of the going up.
Happy is the worshipper of the Lord, who is walking in his ways.
You will have the fruit of the work of your hands: happy will you be, and all will be well for you.
Your wife will be like a fertile vine in the inmost parts of your house: your children will be like olive plants round your table.
See! this is the blessing of the worshipper of the Lord.
May the Lord send you blessing out of Zion: may you see the good of Jerusalem all the days of your life.
May you see your children's children. Peace be on Israel.A Song of the going up.
Great have been my troubles from the time when I was young (let Israel now say);
Great have been my troubles from the time when I was young, but my troubles have not overcome me.
The ploughmen were ploughing on my back; long were the wounds they made.
The Lord is true: the cords of the evil-doers are broken in two.
Let all the haters of Zion be shamed and turned back.
Let them be like the grass on the house-tops, which is dry before it comes to full growth.
He who gets in the grain has no use for it; and they do not make bands of it for the grain-stems.
And those who go by do not say, The blessing of the Lord be on you; we give you blessing in the name of the Lord.A Song of the going up.
Out of the deep have I sent up my cry to you, O Lord.
Lord, let my voice come before you: let your ears be awake to the voice of my prayer.
O Jah, if you took note of every sin, who would go free?
But there is forgiveness with you, so that you may be feared.
I am waiting for the Lord, my soul is waiting for him, and my hope is in his word.
My soul is watching for the Lord more than those who are watching for the morning; yes, more than the watchers for the morning.
O Israel, have hope in the Lord; for with the Lord is mercy and full salvation.
And he will make Israel free from all his sins.A Song of the going up. Of David.
Lord, there is no pride in my heart and my eyes are not lifted up; and I have not taken part in great undertakings, or in things over-hard for me.
See, I have made my soul calm and quiet, like a child on its mother's breast; my soul is like a child on its mother's breast.
O Israel, have hope in the Lord, from this time and for ever.A Song of the going up.
Lord, give thought to David, and to all his troubles;
How he made an oath to the Lord, and gave his word to the great God of Jacob, saying,
Truly, I will not come into my house, or go to my bed,
I will not give sleep to my eyes, or rest to my eyeballs,
Till I have got a place for the Lord, a resting-place for the great God of Jacob.
We had news of it at Ephrathah: we came to it in the fields of the wood.
Let us go into his tent; let us give worship at his feet.
Come back, O Lord, to your resting-place; you and the ark of your strength.
Let your priests be clothed with righteousness; and let your saints give cries of joy.
Because of your servant David, do not give up your king.
The Lord gave a true oath to David, which he will not take back, saying, I will give your kingdom to the fruit of your body.
If your children keep my word, and the teachings which I will give them, their children will be rulers of your kingdom for ever.
For the Lord's heart is on Zion, desiring it for his resting-place.
This is my rest for ever: here will I ever be; for this is my desire.
My blessing will be on her food; and her poor will be full of bread.
Her priests will be clothed with salvation; and her saints will give cries of joy.
There I will make the horn of David fertile: I have made ready a light for my king.
His haters will be clothed with shame; but I will make his crown shining.A Song of the going up. Of David.
See how good and how pleasing it is for brothers to be living together in harmony!
It is like oil of great price on the head, flowing down over the face, even Aaron's face: coming down to the edge of his robe;
Like the dew of Hermon, which comes down on the mountains of Zion: for there the Lord gave orders for the blessing, even life for ever.A Song of the going up.
Give praise to the Lord, all you servants of the Lord, who take your places in the house of the Lord by night.
Give praise to the Lord, lifting up your hands in his holy place.
May the Lord, who made heaven and earth, send you blessing out of Zion,Let the Lord be praised. O you servants of the Lord, give praise to the name of the Lord.
You who are in the house of the Lord, and in the open spaces of the house of our God,
Give praise to Jah, for he is good: make melody to his name, for it is pleasing.
For the Lord has taken Jacob for himself, and Israel for his property.
I know that the Lord is great, and that our Lord is greater than all other gods.
The Lord has done whatever was pleasing to him, in heaven, and on the earth, in the seas and in all the deep waters.
He makes the mists go up from the ends of the earth; he makes thunder-flames for the rain; he sends out the winds from his store-houses.
He put to death the first-fruits of Egypt, of man and of beast.
He sent signs and wonders among you, O Egypt, on Pharaoh, and on all his servants.
He overcame great nations, and put strong kings to death;
Sihon, king of the Amorites, and Og, king of Bashan, and all the kingdoms of Canaan;
And gave their land for a heritage, even for a heritage to Israel his people.
O Lord, your name is eternal; and the memory of you will have no end.
For the Lord will be judge of his people's cause; his feelings will be changed to his servants.
The images of the nations are silver and gold, the work of men's hands.
They have mouths, but no voice, they have eyes, but they do not see;
They have ears, but no hearing; and there is no breath in their mouths.
Those who make them are like them; and so is everyone who puts his hope in them.
Give praise to the Lord, O children of Israel: give praise to the Lord, O sons of Aaron:
Give praise to the Lord, O sons of Levi: let all the worshippers of the Lord give him praise.
Praise be to the Lord out of Zion, even to the Lord whose house is in Jerusalem, Let the Lord be praised.O give praise to the Lord, for he is good: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
O give praise to the God of gods: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
O give praise to the Lord of lords: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
To him who only does great wonders: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
To him who by wisdom made the heavens: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
To him by whom the earth was stretched out over the waters: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
To him who made great lights: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
The sun to have rule by day: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
The moon and the stars to have rule by night: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
To him who put to death the first-fruits of Egypt: for his mercy is unchanging for ever:
And took out Israel from among them: for his mercy is unchanging for ever:
With a strong hand and an outstretched arm: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
To him who made a way through the Red Sea: for his mercy is unchanging for ever:
And let Israel go through it: for his mercy is unchanging for ever:
By him Pharaoh and his army were overturned in the Red Sea: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
To him who took his people through the waste land: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
To him who overcame great kings: for his mercy is unchanging for ever:
And put noble kings to death: for his mercy is unchanging for ever:
Sihon, king of the Amorites: for his mercy is unchanging for ever:
And Og, king of Bashan: for his mercy is unchanging for ever:
And gave their land to his people for a heritage: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
Even a heritage for his servant Israel: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
Who kept us in mind when we were in trouble: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
And has taken us out of the hands of our haters: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
Who gives food to all flesh: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
O give praise to the God of heaven: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.By the rivers of Babylon we were seated, weeping at the memory of Zion,
Hanging our instruments of music on the trees by the waterside.
For there those who had taken us prisoners made request for a song; and those who had taken away all we had gave us orders to be glad, saying, Give us one of the songs of Zion.
How may we give the Lord's song in a strange land?
If I keep not your memory, O Jerusalem, let not my right hand keep the memory of its art.
If I let you go out of my thoughts, and if I do not put Jerusalem before my greatest joy, let my tongue be fixed to the roof of my mouth.
O Lord, keep in mind against the children of Edom the day of Jerusalem; how they said, Let it be uncovered, uncovered even to its base.
O daughter of Babylon, whose fate is destruction; happy is the man who does to you what you have done to us.
Happy is the man who takes your little ones, crushing them against the rocks.Of David.
I will give you praise with all my heart: I will make melody to you before the gods.
I will give worship before your holy Temple, praising your name for your mercy and for your unchanging faith: for you have made your word greater than all your name.
When my cry came to your ears you gave me an answer, and made me great with strength in my soul.
All the kings of the earth will give you praise, O Lord, when the words of your mouth come to their ears.
They will make songs about the ways of the Lord; for great is the glory of the Lord.
Though the Lord is high, he sees those who are low; and he has knowledge from far off of those who are lifted up.
Even when trouble is round me, you will give me life; your hand will be stretched out against the wrath of my haters, and your right hand will be my salvation.
The Lord will make all things complete for me: O Lord, your mercy is eternal; do not give up the works of your hands.To the chief music-maker. A Psalm. Of David.
O Lord, you have knowledge of me, searching out all my secrets.
You have knowledge when I am seated and when I get up, you see my thoughts from far away.
You keep watch over my steps and my sleep, and have knowledge of all my ways.
For there is not a word on my tongue which is not clear to you, O Lord.
I am shut in by you on every side, and you have put your hand on me.
Such knowledge is a wonder greater than my powers; it is so high that I may not come near it.
Where may I go from your spirit? how may I go in flight from you?
If I go up to heaven, you are there: or if I make my bed in the underworld, you are there.
If I take the wings of the morning, and go to the farthest parts of the sea;
Even there will I be guided by your hand, and your right hand will keep me.
If I say, Only let me be covered by the dark, and the light about me be night;
Even the dark is not dark to you; the night is as bright as the day: for dark and light are the same to you.
My flesh was made by you, and my parts joined together in my mother's body.
I will give you praise, for I am strangely and delicately formed; your works are great wonders, and of this my soul is fully conscious.
My frame was not unseen by you when I was made secretly, and strangely formed in the lowest parts of the earth.
Your eyes saw my unformed substance; in your book all my days were recorded, even those which were purposed before they had come into being.
How dear are your thoughts to me, O God! how great is the number of them!
If I made up their number, it would be more than the grains of sand; when I am awake, I am still with you.
If only you would put the sinners to death, O God; go far from me, you men of blood.
For they go against you with evil designs, and your haters make sport of your name.
Are not your haters hated by me, O Lord? are not those who are lifted up against you a cause of grief to me?
My hate for them is complete; my thoughts of them are as if they were making war on me.
O God, let the secrets of my heart be uncovered, and let my wandering thoughts be tested:
See if there is any way of sorrow in me, and be my guide in the eternal way.To the chief music-maker. A Psalm. Of David.
O Lord, take me out of the power of the evil man; keep me safe from the violent man:
For their hearts are full of evil designs; and they are ever making ready causes of war.
Their tongues are sharp like the tongue of a snake; the poison of snakes is under their lips. (Selah.)
O Lord, take me out of the hands of sinners; keep me safe from the violent man: for they are designing my downfall.
The men of pride have put secret cords for my feet; stretching nets in my way, so that they may take me with their tricks. (Selah.)
I have said to the Lord, You are my God: give ear, O Lord, to the voice of my prayer.
O Lord God, the strength of my salvation, you have been a cover over my head in the day of the fight.
O Lord, give not the wrongdoer his desire; give him no help in his evil designs, or he may be uplifted in pride. (Selah.)
As for those who come round me, let their heads be covered by the evil of their lips.
Let burning flames come down on them: let them be put into the fire, and into deep waters, so that they may not get up again.
Let not a man of evil tongue be safe on earth: let destruction overtake the violent man with blow on blow.
I am certain that the Lord will take care of the cause of the poor, and of the rights of those who are troubled.
Truly, the upright will give praise to your name: the holy will have a place in your house.A Psalm. Of David.
Lord, I have made my cry to you; come to me quickly; give ear to my voice, when it goes up to you.
Let my prayer be ordered before you like a sweet smell; and let the lifting up of my hands be like the evening offering.
O Lord, keep a watch over my mouth; keep the door of my lips.
Keep my heart from desiring any evil thing, or from taking part in the sins of the evil- doers with men who do wrong: and let me have no part in their good things.
Let the upright give me punishment; and let the god-fearing man put me in the right way; but I will not let the oil of sinners come on my head: when they do evil I will give myself to prayer.
When destruction comes to their judges by the side of the rock, they will give ear to my words, for they are sweet.
Our bones are broken up at the mouth of the underworld, as the earth is broken by the plough.
But my eyes are turned to you, O Lord God: my hope is in you; let not my soul be given up to death.
Keep me from the net which they have put down for me, and from the designs of the workers of evil.
Let the sinners be taken in the nets which they themselves have put down, while I go free.Maschil. Of David. A prayer when he was in the hole of the rock.
The sound of my cry went up to the Lord; with my voice I made my prayer for grace to the Lord.
I put all my sorrows before him; and made clear to him all my trouble.
When my spirit is overcome, your eyes are on my goings; nets have been secretly placed in the way in which I go.
Looking to my right side, I saw no man who was my friend: I had no safe place; no one had any care for my soul.
I have made my cry to you, O Lord; I have said, You are my safe place, and my heritage in the land of the living.
Give ear to my cry, for I am made very low: take me out of the hands of my haters, for they are stronger than I.
Take my soul out of prison, so that I may give praise to your name: the upright will give praise because of me; for you have given me a full reward.A Psalm. Of David.
Let my prayer come to you, O Lord; give ear to my requests for your grace; keep faith with me, and give me an answer in your righteousness;
Let not your servant come before you to be judged; for no man living is upright in your eyes.
The evil man has gone after my soul; my life is crushed down to the earth: he has put me in the dark, like those who have long been dead.
Because of this my spirit is overcome; and my heart is full of fear.
I keep in mind the early days of the past, giving thought to all your acts, even to the work of your hands.
My hands are stretched out to you: my soul is turned to you, like a land in need of water. (Selah.)
Be quick in answering me, O Lord, for the strength of my spirit is gone: let me see your face, so that I may not be like those who go down into the underworld.
Let the story of your mercy come to me in the morning, for my hope is in you: give me knowledge of the way in which I am to go; for my soul is lifted up to you.
O Lord, take me out of the hands of my haters; my soul is waiting for you.
Give me teaching so that I may do your pleasure; for you are my God: let your good Spirit be my guide into the land of righteousness.
Give me life, O Lord, because of your name; in your righteousness take my soul out of trouble.
And in your mercy put an end to my haters, and send destruction on all those who are against my soul; for I am your servant.A Psalm. Of David.
Praise be to the God of my strength, teaching my hands the use of the sword, and my fingers the art of fighting:
He is my strength, and my Rock; my high tower, and my saviour; my keeper and my hope: he gives me authority over my people.
Lord, what is man, that you keep him in mind? or the son of man that you take him into account?
Man is like a breath: his life is like a shade which is quickly gone.
Come down, O Lord, from your heavens: at your touch let the mountains give out smoke.
With your storm-flames send them in flight: send out your arrows for their destruction.
Put out your hand from on high; make me free, take me safely out of the great waters, and out of the hands of strange men;
In whose mouths are false words, and whose right hand is a right hand of deceit.
I will make a new song to you, O God; I will make melody to you on an instrument of ten cords.
It is God who gives salvation to kings; and who kept his servant David from the wounding sword.
Make me free, and take me out of the hands of strange men, in whose mouths are false words, and whose right hand is a right hand of deceit.
Our sons are like tall young plants; and our daughters like the shining stones of a king's house;
Our store-houses are full of all good things; and our sheep give birth to thousands and ten thousands in our fields.
Our oxen are well weighted down; our cows give birth safely; there is no going out, and there is no cry of sorrow in our open places.
Happy is the nation whose ways are so ordered: yes, happy is the nation whose God is the Lord.A Song of praise. Of David.
Let me give glory to you, O God, my King; and blessing to your name for ever and ever.
Every day will I give you blessing, praising your name for ever and ever.
Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised; his power may never be searched out.
One generation after another will give praise to your great acts, and make clear the operation of your strength.
My thoughts will be of the honour and glory of your rule, and of the wonder of your works.
Men will be talking of the power and fear of your acts; I will give word of your glory.
Their sayings will be full of the memory of all your mercy, and they will make songs of your righteousness.
The Lord is full of grace and pity; not quickly angry, but great in mercy.
The Lord is good to all men; and his mercies are over all his works.
Alltheworksofyourhandsgivepraisetoyou, OLord; andyoursaintsgiveyoublessing.
Their words will be of the glory of your kingdom, and their talk of your strength;
So that the sons of men may have knowledge of his acts of power, and of the great glory of his kingdom.
Your kingdom is an eternal kingdom, and your rule is through all generations.
The Lord is the support of all who are crushed, and the lifter up of all who are bent down.
The eyes of all men are waiting for you; and you give them their food in its time.
By the opening of your hand, every living thing has its desire in full measure.
The Lord is upright in all his ways, and kind in all his works.
The Lord is near all those who give honour to his name; even to all who give honour to him with true hearts.
To his worshippers, he will give their desire; their cry comes to his ears, and he gives them salvation.
The Lord will keep all his worshippers from danger; but he will send destruction on all sinners.
My mouth will give praise to the Lord; let all flesh be blessing his holy name for ever and ever.Let the Lord be praised. Give praise to the Lord, O my soul.
While I have breath I will give praise to the Lord: I will make melody to my God while I have my being.
Put not your faith in rulers, or in the son of man, in whom there is no salvation.
Man's breath goes out, he is turned back again to dust; in that day all his purposes come to an end.
Happy is the man who has the God of Jacob for his help, whose hope is in the Lord his God:
Who made heaven and earth, the sea, and all things in them; who keeps faith for ever:
Who gives their rights to those who are crushed down; and gives food to those who are in need of it: the Lord makes the prisoners free;
The Lord makes open the eyes of the blind; the Lord is the lifter up of those who are bent down; the Lord is a lover of the upright;
The Lord takes care of those who are in a strange land; he gives help to the widow and to the child who has no father; but he sends destruction on the way of sinners.
The Lord will be King for ever; your God, O Zion, will be King through all generations. Praise be to the Lord.Give praise to the Lord; for it is good to make melody to our God; praise is pleasing and beautiful.
The Lord is building up Jerusalem; he makes all the outlaws of Israel come together.
He makes the broken-hearted well, and puts oil on their wounds.
He sees the number of the stars; he gives them all their names.
Great is our Lord, and great his power; there is no limit to his wisdom.
The Lord gives help to the poor in spirit; but he sends sinners down in shame.
Make songs of praise to the Lord; make melody to our God with instruments of music.
By his hand the heaven is covered with clouds and rain is stored up for the earth; he makes the grass tall on the mountains.
He gives food to every beast, and to the young ravens in answer to their cry.
He has no delight in the strength of a horse; he takes no pleasure in the legs of a man.
The Lord takes pleasure in his worshippers, and in those whose hope is in his mercy.
Give praise to the Lord, O Jerusalem; give praise to your God, O Zion.
He has made strong the iron bands of your doors; he has sent blessings on your children inside your walls.
He gives peace in all your land, making your stores full of fat grain.
He sends out his orders to the earth; his word goes out quickly.
He gives snow like wool; he sends out ice-drops like dust.
He sends down ice like raindrops: water is made hard by his cold.
At the outgoing of his word, the ice is turned to water; when he sends out his wind, there is a flowing of waters.
He makes his word clear to Jacob, teaching Israel his laws and his decisions.
He has not done these things for any other nation: and as for his laws, they have no knowledge of them. Let the Lord be praised.Give praise to the Lord. Let the Lord be praised from the heavens: give him praise in the skies.
Give praise to him, all you his angels: give praise to him, all his armies.
Give praise to him, you sun and moon: give praise to him, all you stars of light.
Give praise to him, you highest heavens, and you waters which are over the heavens.
Let them give praise to the name of the Lord: for he gave the order, and they were made.
He has put them in their places for ever; he has given them their limits which may not be broken.
Give praise to the Lord from the earth, you great sea-beasts, and deep places:
Fire and rain of ice, snow and mists; storm-wind, doing his word:
Mountains and all hills; fruit-trees and all trees of the mountains:
Beasts and all cattle; insects and winged birds:
Kings of the earth, and all peoples; rulers and all judges of the earth:
Young men and virgins; old men and children:
Let them give glory to the name of the Lord: for his name only is to be praised: his kingdom is over the earth and the heaven.
He has put on high the horn of his people, for the praise of all his saints; even the children of Israel, a people which is near to him. Let the Lord be praised.Let the Lord be praised. Make a new song to the Lord, let his praise be in the meeting of his saints.
Let Israel have joy in his maker; let the children of Zion be glad in their King.
Let them give praise to his name in the dance: let them make melody to him with instruments of brass and corded instruments of music.
For the Lord has pleasure in his people: he gives the poor in spirit a crown of salvation.
Let the saints have joy and glory: let them give cries of joy on their beds.
Let the high praises of God be in their mouths, and a two-edged sword in their hands;
To give the nations the reward of their sins, and the peoples their punishment;
To put their kings in chains, and their rulers in bands of iron;
To give them the punishment which is in the holy writings: this honour is given to all his saints. Praise be to the Lord.Let the Lord be praised. Give praise to God in his holy place: give him praise in the heaven of his power.
Give him praise for his acts of power: give him praise in the measure of his great strength.
Give him praise with the sound of the horn: give him praise with corded instruments of music.
Give him praise with instruments of brass and in the dance: give him praise with horns and corded instruments.
Give him praise with the loud brass: give him praise with the high-sounding brass.
Let everything which has breath give praise to the Lord. Let the Lord be praised.Happy is the man who does not go in the company of sinners, or take his place in the way of evil-doers, or in the seat of those who do not give honour to the Lord.
But whose delight is in the law of the Lord, and whose mind is on his law day and night.
He will be like a tree planted by the rivers of water, which gives its fruit at the right time, whose leaves will ever be green; and he will do well in all his undertakings.
The evil-doers are not so; but are like the dust from the grain, which the wind takes away.
For this cause there will be no mercy for sinners when they are judged, and the evil- doers will have no place among the upright,
Because the Lord sees the way of the upright, but the end of the sinner is destruction.A Psalm. Of David. When he went in flight from Absalom his son.
Lord, how greatly are they increased who make attacks on me! in great numbers they come against me.
Unnumbered are those who say of my soul, There is no help for him in God. (Selah.)
But your strength, O Lord, is round me, you are my glory and the lifter up of my head.
I send up a cry to the Lord with my voice, and he gives me an answer from his holy hill. (Selah.)
I took my rest in sleep, and then again I was awake; for the Lord was my support.
I will have no fear, though ten thousand have come round me, putting themselves against me.
Come to me, Lord; keep me safe, O my God; for you have given all my haters blows on their face-bones; the teeth of the evil-doers have been broken by you.
Salvation comes from the Lord; your blessing is on your people. (Selah.)To the chief music-maker on corded instruments. A Psalm. Of David.
Give answer to my cry, O God of my righteousness; make me free from my troubles; have mercy on me, and give ear to my prayer.
O you sons of men, how long will you go on turning my glory into shame? how long will you give your love to foolish things, going after what is false? (Selah.)
See how the Lord has made great his mercy for me; the Lord will give ear to my cry.
Let there be fear in your hearts, and do no sin; have bitter feelings on your bed, but make no sound. (Selah.)
Give the offerings of righteousness, and put your faith in the Lord.
There are numbers who say, Who will do us any good? the light of his face has gone from us.
Lord, you have put joy in my heart, more than they have when their grain and their wine are increased.
I will take my rest on my bed in peace, because you only, Lord, keep me safe.To the chief music-maker on wind instruments. A Psalm. Of David.
Give ear to my words, O Lord; give thought to my heart-searchings.
Let the voice of my cry come to you, my King and my God; for to you will I make my prayer.
My voice will come to you in the morning, O Lord; in the morning will I send my prayer to you, and keep watch.
For you are not a God who takes pleasure in wrongdoing; there is no evil with you.
The sons of pride have no place before you; you are a hater of all workers of evil.
You will send destruction on those whose words are false; the cruel man and the man of deceit are hated by the Lord.
But as for me, I will come into your house, in the full measure of your mercy; and in your fear I will give worship, turning my eyes to your holy Temple.
Be my guide, O Lord, in the ways of your righteousness, because of those who are against me; make your way straight before my face.
For no faith may be put in their words; their inner part is nothing but evil; their throat is like an open place for the dead; smooth are the words of their tongues.
Send them to destruction, O Lord; let their evil designs be the cause of their fall; let them be forced out by all their sins; because they have gone against your authority.
But let all those who put their faith in you be glad with cries of joy at all times, and let all the lovers of your name be glad in you.
For you, Lord, will send a blessing on the upright man; your grace will be round him, and you will be his strength.To the chief music-maker on corded instruments, on the Sheminith. A Psalm. Of David.
O Lord, do not be bitter with me in your wrath; do not send punishment on me in the heat of your passion.
Have mercy on me, O Lord, for I am wasted away: make me well, for even my bones are troubled.
My soul is in bitter trouble; and you, O Lord, how long?
Come back, O Lord, make my soul free; O give me salvation because of your mercy.
For in death there is no memory of you; in the underworld who will give you praise?
The voice of my sorrow is a weariness to me; all the night I make my bed wet with weeping; it is watered by the drops flowing from my eyes.
My eyes are wasting away with trouble; they are becoming old because of all those who are against me.
Go from me, all you workers of evil; for the Lord has given ear to the voice of my weeping.
The Lord has given ear to my request; the Lord has let my prayer come before him.
Let all those who are against me be shamed and deeply troubled; let them be turned back and suddenly put to shame.Shiggaion of David; a song which he made to the Lord, about the words of Cush the Benjamite.
O Lord my God, I put my faith in you; take me out of the hands of him who is cruel to me, and make me free;
So that he may not come rushing on my soul like a lion, wounding it, while there is no one to be my saviour.
O Lord my God, if I have done this; if my hands have done any wrong;
If I have given back evil to him who did evil to me, or have taken anything from him who was against me without cause;
Let my hater go after my soul and take it; let my life be crushed to the earth, and my honour into the dust. (Selah.)
Come up, Lord, in your wrath; be lifted up against my haters; be awake, my God, give orders for the judging.
The meeting of the nations will be round you; take your seat, then, over them, on high.
The Lord will be judge of the peoples; give a decision for me, O Lord, because of my righteousness, and let my virtue have its reward.
O let the evil of the evil-doer come to an end, but give strength to the upright: for men's minds and hearts are tested by the God of righteousness.
God, who is the saviour of the upright in heart, is my breastplate.
God is the judge of the upright, and is angry with the evil-doers every day.
If a man is not turned from his evil, he will make his sword sharp; his bow is bent and ready.
He has made ready for him the instruments of death; he makes his arrows flames of fire.
That man is a worker of evil; the seed of wrongdoing has given birth to deceit.
He has made a hole deep in the earth, and is falling into the hole which he has made
His wrongdoing will come back to him, and his violent behaviour will come down on his head.
I will give praise to the Lord for his righteousness; I will make a song to the name of the Lord Most High.To the chief music-maker on the Gittith. A Psalm. Of David.
O Lord, our Lord, whose glory is higher than the heavens, how noble is your name in all the earth!
You have made clear your strength even out of the mouths of babies at the breast, because of those who are against you; so that you may put to shame the cruel and violent man.
When I see your heavens, the work of your fingers, the moon and the stars, which you have put in their places;
What is man, that you keep him in mind? the son of man, that you take him into account?
For you have made him only a little lower than the gods, crowning him with glory and honour.
You have made him ruler over the works of your hands; you have put all things under his feet;
All sheep and oxen, and all the beasts of the field;
The birds of the air and the fish of the sea, and whatever goes through the deep waters of the seas.
O Lord, our Lord, how noble is your name in all the earth!To the chief music-maker on Muthlabben. A Psalm. Of David.
I will give you praise, O Lord, with all my heart; I will make clear all the wonder of your works.
I will be glad and have delight in you: I will make a song of praise to your name, O Most High.
When my haters are turned back, they will be broken and overcome before you.
For you gave approval to my right and my cause; you were seated in your high place judging in righteousness.
You have said sharp words to the nations, you have sent destruction on the sinners, you have put an end to their name for ever and ever.
You have given their towns to destruction; the memory of them has gone; they have become waste for ever.
But the Lord is King for ever: he has made ready his high seat for judging.
And he will be the judge of the world in righteousness, giving true decisions for the peoples.
The Lord will be a high tower for those who are crushed down, a high tower in times of trouble;
And those who have knowledge of your name will put their faith in you; because you, Lord, have ever given your help to those who were waiting for you.
Make songs of praise to the Lord, whose house is in Zion: make his doings clear to the people.
When he makes search for blood, he has them in his memory: he is not without thought for the cry of the poor.
Have mercy on me, O Lord, and see how I am troubled by my haters; let me be lifted up from the doors of death;
So that I may make clear all your praise in the house of the daughter of Zion: I will be glad because of your salvation.
The nations have gone down into the hole which they made: in their secret net is their foot taken.
The Lord has given knowledge of himself through his judging: the evil-doer is taken in the net which his hands had made. (Higgaion. Selah.)
The sinners and all the nations who have no memory of God will be turned into the underworld.
For the poor will not be without help; the hopes of those in need will not be crushed for ever.
Up! O Lord; let not man overcome you: let the nations be judged before you.
Put them in fear, O Lord, so that the nations may see that they are only men. (Selah.)Why do you keep far away, O Lord? why are you not to be seen in times of trouble?
The evil-doer in his pride is cruel to the poor; let him be taken by the tricks of his invention.
For the evil-doer is lifted up because of the purpose of his heart, and he whose mind is fixed on wealth is turned away from the Lord, saying evil against him.
The evil-doer in his pride says, God will not make a search. All his thoughts are, There is no God.
His ways are ever fixed; your decisions are higher than he may see: as for his haters, they are as nothing to him.
He has said in his heart, I will not be moved: through all generations I will never be in trouble.
His mouth is full of cursing and deceit and false words: under his tongue are evil purposes and dark thoughts.
He is waiting in the dark places of the towns: in the secret places he puts to death those who have done no wrong: his eyes are secretly turned against the poor.
He keeps himself in a secret place like a lion in his hole, waiting to put his hands on the poor man, and pulling him into his net.
The upright are crushed and made low, and the feeble are overcome by his strong ones.
He says in his heart, God has no memory of me: his face is turned away; he will never see it.
Up! O Lord; let your hand be lifted: give thought to the poor.
Why has the evil-doer a low opinion of God, saying in his heart, You will not make search for it?
You have seen it; for your eyes are on sorrow and grief, to take it into your hand: the poor man puts his faith in you; you have been the helper of the child who has no father.
Let the arm of the sinner and the evil-doer be broken; go on searching for his sin till there is no more.
The Lord is King for ever and ever; the nations are gone from his land.
Lord, you have given ear to the prayer of the poor: you will make strong their hearts, you will give them a hearing:
To give decision for the child without a father and for the broken-hearted, so that the man of the earth may no longer be feared.For the chief music-maker. Of David.
In the Lord put I my faith; how will you say to my soul, Go in flight like a bird to the mountain?
See, the bows of the evil-doers are bent, they make ready their arrows on the cord, so that they may send them secretly against the upright in heart.
If the bases are broken down, what is the upright man to do?
The Lord is in his holy Temple, the Lord's seat is in heaven; his eyes are watching and testing the children of men.
The Lord puts the upright and the sinner to the test, but he has hate in his soul for the lover of violent acts.
On the evil-doer he will send down fire and flames, and a burning wind; with these will their cup be full.
For the Lord is upright; he is a lover of righteousness: the upright will see his face.For the chief music-maker on the Sheminith. A Psalm. Of David.
Send help, Lord, for mercy has come to an end; there is no more faith among the children of men.
Everyone says false words to his neighbour: their tongues are smooth in their talk, and their hearts are full of deceit.
The smooth lips and the tongue of pride will be cut off by the Lord.
They have said, With our tongues will we overcome; our lips are ours: who is lord over us?
Because of the crushing of the poor and the weeping of those in need, now will I come to his help, says the Lord; I will give him the salvation which he is desiring.
The words of the Lord are true words: like silver tested by fire and burned clean seven times.
You will keep them, O Lord, you will keep them safe from this generation for ever.
The sinners are walking on every side, and evil is honoured among the children of men.To the chief music-maker. A Psalm. Of David.
Will you for ever put me out of your memory, O Lord? will your face for ever be turned away from me?
How long is my soul to be in doubt, with sorrow in my heart all the day? how long will he who is against me be given power over me?
Let my voice come before you, and give me an answer, O Lord my God; let your light be shining on me, so that the sleep of death may not overtake me;
And he who is against me may not say, I have overcome him; and those who are troubling me may not be glad when I am moved.
But I have had faith in your mercy; my heart will be glad in your salvation.
I will make a song to the Lord, because he has given me my reward.To the chief music-maker. Of David.
The foolish man has said in his heart, God will not do anything. They are unclean, they have done evil works; there is not one who does good.
The Lord was looking down from heaven on the children of men, to see if there were any who had wisdom, searching after God.
They have all gone out of the way together; they are unclean, there is not one who does good, no, not one.
Have all the workers of evil no knowledge? they take my people for food as they would take bread; they make no prayer to the Lord.
Then were they in great fear: for God is in the generation of the upright.
You have put to shame the thoughts of the poor, but the Lord is his support.
May the salvation of Israel come out of Zion! when the fate of his people is changed by the Lord, Jacob will have joy and Israel will be glad.A Psalm. Of David.
Lord, who may have a resting-place in your tent, a living-place on your holy hill?
He who goes on his way uprightly, doing righteousness, and saying what is true in his heart;
Whose tongue is not false, who does no evil to his friend, and does not take away the good name of his neighbour;
Who gives honour to those who have the fear of the Lord, turning away from him who has not the Lord's approval. He who takes an oath against himself, and makes no change.
He who does not put out his money at interest, or for payment give false decisions against men who have done no wrong. He who does these things will never be moved.Michtam. Of David.
Keep me safe, O God: for in you I have put my faith.
O my soul, you have said to the Lord, You are my Lord: I have no good but you.
As for the saints who are in the earth, they are the noble in whom is all my delight.
Their sorrows will be increased who go after another god: I will not take drink offerings from their hands, or take their names on my lips.
The Lord is my heritage and the wine of my cup; you are the supporter of my right.
Fair are the places marked out for me; I have a noble heritage.
I will give praise to the Lord who has been my guide; knowledge comes to me from my thoughts in the night.
I have put the Lord before me at all times; because he is at my right hand, I will not be moved.
Because of this my heart is glad, and my glory is full of joy: while my flesh takes its rest in hope.
For you will not let my soul be prisoned in the underworld; you will not let your loved one see the place of death.
You will make clear to me the way of life; where you are joy is complete; in your right hand there are pleasures for ever and ever.A Prayer. Of David.
Let my cause come to your ears, O Lord, give attention to my cry; give ear to my prayer which goes not out from false lips.
Be my judge; for your eyes see what is right.
You have put my heart to the test, searching me in the night; you have put me to the test and seen no evil purpose in me; I will keep my mouth from sin.
As for the works of men, by the word of your lips I have kept myself from the ways of the violent.
I have kept my feet in your ways, my steps have not been turned away.
My cry has gone up to you, for you will give me an answer, O God: let your ear be turned to me, and give attention to my words.
Make clear the wonder of your mercy, O saviour of those who put their faith in your right hand, from those who come out against them.
Keep me as the light of your eyes, covering me with the shade of your wings,
From the evil-doers who are violent to me, and from those who are round me, desiring my death.
They are shut up in their fat: with their mouths they say words of pride.
They have made a circle round our steps: their eyes are fixed on us, forcing us down to the earth;
Like a lion desiring its food, and like a young lion waiting in secret places.
Up! Lord, come out against him, make him low, with your sword be my saviour from the evil-doer.
With your hand, O Lord, from men, even men of the world, whose heritage is in this life, and whom you make full with your secret wealth: they are full of children; after their death their offspring take the rest of their goods.
As for me, I will see your face in righteousness: when I am awake it will be joy enough for me to see your form.To the chief music-maker. Of the servant of the Lord, of David, who said the words of this song to the Lord on the day when the Lord made him free from the hand of all his haters, and from the hand of Saul; and he said,
I will give you my love, O Lord, my strength.
The Lord is my Rock, my walled town, and my saviour; my God, my Rock, in him will I put my faith; my breastplate, and the horn of my salvation, and my high tower.
I will send up my cry to the Lord, who is to be praised; so will I be made safe from those who are against me.
The cords of death were round me, and the seas of evil put me in fear.
The cords of hell were round me: the nets of death came on me.
In my trouble my voice went up to the Lord, and my cry to my God: my voice came to his hearing in his holy Temple, and my prayer came before him, even into his ears.
Then trouble and shock came on the earth; and the bases of the mountains were moved and shaking, because he was angry.
There went up a smoke from his nose, and a fire of destruction from his mouth: flames were lighted by it.
The heavens were bent, so that he might come down; and it was dark under his feet.
And he went in flight through the air, seated on a storm-cloud: going quickly on the wings of the wind.
He made the dark his secret place; his tent round him was the dark waters and thick clouds of the skies.
Before his shining light his dark clouds went past, raining ice and fire.
The Lord made thunder in the heavens, and the voice of the Highest was sounding out: a rain of ice and fire.
He sent out his arrows, driving them in all directions; by his flames of fire they were troubled.
Then the deep beds of the waters were seen, and the bases of the world were uncovered, because of your words of wrath, O Lord, because of the breath from your mouth.
He sent from on high, he took me, pulling me out of great waters.
He made me free from my strong hater, and from those who were against me, because they were stronger than I.
They came on me in the day of my trouble; but the Lord was my support.
He took me out into a wide place; he was my saviour because he had delight in me.
The Lord gives me the reward of my righteousness, because my hands are clean before him.
For I have kept the ways of the Lord; I have not been turned away in sin from my God.
For all his decisions were before me, and I did not put away his laws from me.
And I was upright before him, and I kept myself from sin.
Because of this the Lord has given me the reward of my righteousness, because my hands are clean in his eyes.
On him who has mercy you will have mercy; to the upright you will be upright;
He who is holy will see that you are holy; but to the man whose way is not straight you will be a hard judge.
For you are the saviour of those who are in trouble; but eyes full of pride will be made low.
You, O Lord, will be my light; by you, my God, the dark will be made bright for me.
By your help I have made a way through the wall which was shutting me in; by the help of my God I have gone over a wall.
AsforGod, hiswayiscompletelygood; thewordoftheLordistested; heisabreastplate for all those who put their faith in him.
For who is God but the Lord? or who is a Rock but our God?
God puts a strong band about me, guiding me in a straight way.
He makes my feet like roes' feet, and puts me on high places.
He makes my hands expert in war, so that a bow of brass is bent by my arms.
You have given me the breastplate of your salvation: your right hand has been my support, and your mercy has made me great.
You have made my steps wide under me, so that my feet are kept from slipping.
I go after my haters and overtake them; not turning back till they are all overcome.
I will give them wounds, so that they are not able to get up: they are stretched under my feet.
For I have been armed by you with strength for the fight: you have made low under me those who come out against me.
By you their backs are turned in flight, so that my haters are cut off.
They were crying out, but there was no one to come to their help: even to the Lord, but he gave them no answer.
Then they were crushed as small as dust before the wind; they were drained out like the waste of the streets.
You have made me free from the fightings of the people; you have made me the head of the nations: a people of whom I had no knowledge will be my servants.
From the time when my name comes to their ears they will be ruled by me: men of other countries will, with false hearts, put themselves under my authority.
They will be wasting away, they will come out of their secret places shaking with fear.
The Lord is living; praise be to my Rock, and let the God of my salvation be honoured.
It is God who sends punishment on my haters, and puts peoples under my rule.
He makes me free from my haters; I am lifted up over those who come up against me: you have made me free from the violent man.
Because of this I will give you praise, O Lord, among the nations, and will make a song of praise to your name.
Great salvation does he give to his king; he has mercy on the king of his selection, David, and on his seed for ever.To the chief music-maker. A Psalm. Of David.
The heavens are sounding the glory of God; the arch of the sky makes clear the work of his hands.
Day after day it sends out its word, and night after night it gives knowledge.
There are no words or language; their voice makes no sound.
Their line has gone out through all the earth, and their words to the end of the world. In them has he put a tent for the sun,
Who is like a newly married man coming from his bride-tent, and is glad like a strong runner starting on his way.
His going out is from the end of the heaven, and his circle to the ends of it; there is nothing which is not open to his heat.
The law of the Lord is good, giving new life to the soul: the witness of the Lord is certain, giving wisdom to the foolish.
The orders of the Lord are right, making glad the heart: the rule of the Lord is holy, giving light to the eyes.
The fear of the Lord is clean, and has no end; the decisions of the Lord are true and full of righteousness.
More to be desired are they than gold, even than much shining gold; sweeter than the dropping honey.
By them is your servant made conscious of danger, and in keeping them there is great reward.
Who has full knowledge of his errors? make me clean from secret evil.
Keep your servant back from sins of pride; let them not have rule over me: then will I be upright and free from great sin.
Let the words of my mouth and the thoughts of my heart be pleasing in your eyes, O Lord, my strength and my salvation.To the chief music-maker. A Psalm. Of David.
May the Lord give ear to you in the day of trouble; may you be placed on high by the name of the God of Jacob;
May he send you help from the holy place, and give you strength from Zion;
May he keep all your offerings in mind, and be pleased with the fat of your burned offerings; (Selah.)
May he give you your heart's desire, and put all your purposes into effect.
We will be glad in your salvation, and in the name of our God we will put up our flags: may the Lord give you all your requests.
Now am I certain that the Lord gives salvation to his king; he will give him an answer from his holy heaven with the strength of salvation in his right hand.
Some put their faith in carriages and some in horses; but we will be strong in the name of the Lord our God.
They are bent down and made low; but we have been lifted up.
Come to our help, Lord: let the king give ear to our cry.To the chief music-maker. A Psalm. Of David.
The king will be glad in your strength, O Lord; how great will be his delight in your salvation!
You have given him his heart's desire, and have not kept back the request of his lips. (Selah.)
For you go before him with the blessings of good things: you put a crown of fair gold on his head.
He made request to you for life, and you gave it to him, long life for ever and ever.
His glory is great in your salvation: honour and authority have you put on him.
For you have made him a blessing for ever: you have given him joy in the light of your face.
For the king has faith in the Lord, and through the mercy of the Most High he will not be moved.
Your hand will make a search for all your haters; your right hand will be hard on all those who are against you.
You will make them like a flaming oven before you; the Lord in his wrath will put an end to them, and they will be burned up in the fire.
Their fruit will be cut off from the earth, and their seed from among the children of men.
For their thoughts were bitter against you: they had an evil design in their minds, which they were not able to put into effect.
Their backs will be turned when you make ready the cords of your bow against their faces.
Be lifted up, O Lord, in your strength; so will we make songs in praise of your power.To the chief music-maker on Aijeleth-hash-shahar. A Psalm. Of David.
My God, my God, why are you turned away from me? why are you so far from helping me, and from the words of my crying?
O my God, I make my cry in the day, and you give no answer; and in the night, and have no rest.
But you are holy, O you who are seated among the praises of Israel.
Our fathers had faith in you: they had faith and you were their saviour.
They sent up their cry to you and were made free: they put their faith in you and were not put to shame.
But I am a worm and not a man; cursed by men, and looked down on by the people.
I am laughed at by all those who see me: pushing out their lips and shaking their heads they say,
He put his faith in the Lord; let the Lord be his saviour now: let the Lord be his saviour, because he had delight in him.
But it was you who took care of me from the day of my birth: you gave me faith even from my mother's breasts.
I was in your hands even before my birth; you are my God from the time when I was in my mother's body.
Be not far from me, for trouble is near; there is no one to give help.
A great herd of oxen is round me: I am shut in by the strong oxen of Bashan.
I saw their mouths wide open, like lions crying after food.
I am flowing away like water, and all my bones are out of place: my heart is like wax, it has become soft in my body.
My throat is dry like a broken vessel; my tongue is fixed to the roof of my mouth, and the dust of death is on my lips.
Dogs have come round me: I am shut in by the band of evil-doers; they made wounds in my hands and feet.
I am able to see all my bones; their looks are fixed on me:
They make a division of my robes among them, by the decision of chance they take my clothing.
Do not be far from me, O Lord: O my strength, come quickly to my help.
Make my soul safe from the sword, my life from the power of the dog.
Be my saviour from the lion's mouth; let me go free from the horns of the cruel oxen.
I will give the knowledge of your name to my brothers: I will give you praise among the people.
You who have fear of the Lord, give him praise; all you seed of Jacob, give him glory; go in fear of him, all you seed of Israel.
For he has not been unmoved by the pain of him who is troubled; or kept his face covered from him; but he has given an answer to his cry.
My praise will be of you in the great meeting: I will make my offerings before his worshippers.
The poor will have a feast of good things: those who make search for the Lord will give him praise: your heart will have life for ever.
All the ends of the earth will keep it in mind and be turned to the Lord: all the families of the nations will give him worship.
For the kingdom is the Lord's; he is the ruler among the nations.
All the fat ones of the earth will give him worship; all those who go down to the dust will make themselves low before him, even he who has not enough for the life of his soul.
A seed will be his servant; the doings of the Lord will be made clear to the generation which comes after.
They will come and make his righteousness clear to a people of the future because he has done this.A Psalm. Of David.
The Lord takes care of me as his sheep; I will not be without any good thing.
He makes a resting-place for me in the green fields: he is my guide by the quiet waters.
He gives new life to my soul: he is my guide in the ways of righteousness because of his name.
Yes, though I go through the valley of deep shade, I will have no fear of evil; for you are with me, your rod and your support are my comfort.
You make ready a table for me in front of my haters: you put oil on my head; my cup is overflowing.
Truly, blessing and mercy will be with me all the days of my life; and I will have a place in the house of the Lord all my days.A Psalm. Of David.
The earth is the Lord's, with all its wealth; the world and all the people living in it.
For by him it was based on the seas, and made strong on the deep rivers.
Who may go up into the hill of the Lord? and who may come into his holy place?
He who has clean hands and a true heart; whose desire has not gone out to foolish things, who has not taken a false oath.
He will have blessing from the Lord, and righteousness from the God of his salvation.
This is the generation of those whose hearts are turned to you, even to your face, O God of Jacob. (Selah.)
Let your heads be lifted up, O doors; be lifted up, O you eternal doors: that the King of glory may come in.
Who is the King of glory? The Lord of strength and power, the Lord strong in war.
Let your heads be lifted up, O doors; let them be lifted up, O you eternal doors: that the King of glory may come in.
Who is the King of glory? The Lord of armies, he is the King of glory. (Selah.)Of David.
To you, O Lord, my soul is lifted up.
OmyGod, Ihaveputmyfaithinyou, letmenotbeshamed; letnotmyhatersbeglorying over me.
Let no servant of yours be put to shame; may those be shamed who are false without cause.
Make your steps clear to me, O Lord; give me knowledge of your ways.
Be my guide and teacher in the true way; for you are the God of my salvation; I am waiting for your word all the day.
O Lord, keep in mind your pity and your mercies; for they have been from the earliest times.
Do not keep in mind my sins when I was young, or my wrongdoing: let your memory of me be full of mercy, O Lord, because of your righteousness.
Good and upright is the Lord: so he will be the teacher of sinners in the way.
He will be an upright guide to the poor in spirit: he will make his way clear to them.
All the ways of the Lord are mercy and good faith for those who keep his agreement and his witness.
Because of your name, O Lord, let me have forgiveness for my sin, which is very great.
If a man has the fear of the Lord, the Lord will be his teacher in the way of his pleasure.
His soul will be full of good things, and his seed will have the earth for its heritage.
The secret of the Lord is with those in whose hearts is the fear of him; he will make his agreement clear to them.
My eyes are turned to the Lord at all times; for he will take my feet out of the net.
Be turned to me, and have mercy on me; for I am troubled and have no helper.
The troubles of my heart are increased: O take me out of my sorrows.
Give thought to my grief and my pain; and take away all my sins.
See how those who are against me are increased, for bitter is their hate of me.
O keep my soul, and take me out of danger: let me not be shamed, for I have put my faith in you.
For my clean and upright ways keep me safe, because my hope is in you.
Give Israel salvation, O God, out of all his troubles.Of David.
O Lord, be my judge, for my behaviour has been upright: I have put my faith in the Lord, I am not in danger of slipping.
Put me in the scales, O Lord, so that I may be tested; let the fire make clean my thoughts and my heart.
For your mercy is before my eyes; and I have gone in the way of your good faith.
I have not taken my seat with foolish persons, and I do not go with false men.
I have been a hater of the band of wrongdoers, and I will not be seated among sinners.
I will make my hands clean from sin; so will I go round your altar, O Lord;
That I may give out the voice of praise, and make public all the wonders which you have done.
Lord, your house has been dear to me, and the resting-place of your glory.
Let not my soul be numbered among sinners, or my life among men of blood;
In whose hands are evil designs, and whose right hands take money for judging falsely.
But as for me, I will go on in my upright ways: be my saviour, and have mercy on me.
I have a safe resting-place for my feet; I will give praise to the Lord in the meetings of the people.Of David.
The Lord is my light and my salvation; who is then a cause of fear to me? the Lord is the strength of my life; who is a danger to me?
When evil-doers, even my haters, came on me to put an end to me, they were broken and put to shame.
Even if an army came against me with its tents, my heart would have no fear: if war was made on me, my faith would not be moved.
One prayer have I made to the Lord, and this is my heart's desire; that I may have a place in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, looking on his glory, and getting wisdom in his Temple.
For in the time of trouble he will keep me safe in his tent: in the secret place of his tent he will keep me from men's eyes; high on a rock he will put me.
And now my head will be lifted up higher than my haters who are round me: because of this I will make offerings of joy in his tent; I will make a song, truly I will make a song of praise to the Lord.
O Lord, let the voice of my cry come to your ears: have mercy on me, and give me an answer.
When you said, Make search for my face, my heart said to you, For your face will I make my search.
Let not your face be covered from me; do not put away your servant in wrath; you have been my help: do not give me up or take your support from me, O God of my salvation.
When my father and my mother are turned away from me, then the Lord will be my support.
Make your way clear to me, O Lord, guiding me by the right way, because of my haters.
Do not give me into their hands, because false witnesses have come out against me, and men breathing destruction.
I had almost given up my hope of seeing the blessing of the Lord in the land of the living.
Let your hope be in the Lord: take heart and be strong; yes, let your hope be in the Lord.Of David.
My cry goes up to you, O Lord, my Rock; do not keep back your answer from me, so that I may not become like those who go down into the underworld.
Give ear to the voice of my prayer, when I am crying to you, when my hands are lifted up to your holy place.
Do not take me away with the sinners and the workers of evil, who say words of peace to their neighbours, but evil is in their hearts.
Give them the right reward of their acts, and of their evil doings: give them punishment for the works of their hands, let them have their full reward.
Because they have no respect for the works of the Lord, or for the things which his hands have made, they will be broken down and not lifted up by him.
May the Lord be praised, because he has given ear to the voice of my prayer.
The Lord is my strength and my breastplate, my heart had faith in him and I am helped; for this cause my heart is full of rapture, and I will give him praise in my song.
The Lord is their strength, and a strong place of salvation for his king.
Be a saviour to your people, and send a blessing on your heritage: be their guide, and let them be lifted up for ever.A Psalm. Of David.
Give to the Lord, you sons of the gods, give to the Lord glory and strength.
Give to the Lord the full glory of his name; give him worship in holy robes.
The voice of the Lord is on the waters: the God of glory is thundering, the Lord is on the great waters.
The voice of the Lord is full of power; the voice of the Lord has a noble sound.
By the voice of the Lord are the cedar-trees broken, even the cedars of Lebanon are broken by the Lord.
He makes them go jumping about like a young ox; Lebanon and Sirion like a young mountain ox.
At the voice of the Lord flames of fire are seen.
At the voice of the Lord there is a shaking in the waste land, even a shaking in the waste land of Kadesh.
At the voice of the Lord the roes give birth, the leaves are taken from the trees: in his Temple everything says, Glory.
The Lord had his seat as king when the waters came on the earth; the Lord is seated as king for ever.
The Lord will give strength to his people; the Lord will give his people the blessing of peace.A Psalm. A Song at the blessing of the House. Of David.
I will give you praise and honour, O Lord, because through you I have been lifted up; you have not given my haters cause to be glad over me.
O Lord my God, I sent up my cry to you, and you have made me well.
O Lord, you have made my soul come again from the underworld: you have given me life and kept me from going down among the dead.
Make songs to the Lord, O you saints of his, and give praise to his holy name.
For his wrath is only for a minute; in his grace there is life; weeping may be for a night, but joy comes in the morning.
When things went well for me I said, I will never be moved.
Lord, by your grace you have kept my mountain strong: when your face was turned from me I was troubled.
My voice went up to you, O Lord; I made my prayer to the Lord.
What profit is there in my blood if I go down into the underworld? will the dust give you praise, or be a witness to your help?
Give ear to me, O Lord, and have mercy on me: Lord, be my helper.
By you my sorrow is turned into dancing; you have taken away my clothing of grief, and given me robes of joy;
So that my glory may make songs of praise to you and not be quiet. O Lord my God, I will give you praise for ever.To the chief music-maker. A Psalm. Of David.
In you, O Lord, have I put my hope; let me never be shamed; keep me safe in your righteousness.
Let your ear be turned to me; take me quickly out of danger; be my strong Rock, my place of strength where I may be safe.
For you are my Rock and my strong tower; go in front of me and be my guide, because of your name.
Take me out of the net which they have put ready for me secretly; for you are my strength.
Into your hands I give my spirit; you are my saviour, O Lord God for ever true.
I am full of hate for those who go after false gods; but my hope is in the Lord.
I will be glad and have delight in your mercy; because you have seen my trouble; you have had pity on my soul in its sorrows;
And you have not given me into the hand of my hater; you have put my feet in a wide place.
Have mercy on me, O Lord, for I am in trouble; my eyes are wasted with grief, I am wasted in soul and body.
Mylifegoesoninsorrow, andmyyearsinweeping; mystrengthisalmostgonebecause of my sin, and my bones are wasted away.
Because of all those who are against me, I have become a word of shame to my neighbours; a cause of shaking the head and a fear to my friends: those who saw me in the street went in flight from me.
I have gone from men's minds and memory like a dead man; I am like a broken vessel.
False statements against me have come to my ears; fear was on every side: they were talking together against me, designing to take away my life.
But I had faith in you, O Lord; I said, You are my God.
The chances of my life are in your hand; take me out of the hands of my haters, and of those who go after me.
Let your servant see the light of your face; in your mercy be my saviour.
Let me not be shamed, O Lord, for I have made my prayer to you; let the sinners be shamed, and let their mouths be shut in the underworld.
Let the false lips be shut, which say evil against the upright, looking down on him in their pride.
O how great is your grace, which you have put in store for your worshippers, and which you have made clear to those who had faith in you, before the sons of men!
You will keep them safe in your house from the designs of man; in the secret of your tent will you keep them from angry tongues.
May the Lord be praised, because he has made clear to me the wonder of his grace in a strong town.
And as for me, I said in my fear, I am cut off from before your eyes; but you gave ear to the voice of my prayer, when my cry went up to you.
O have love for the Lord, all you his saints; for the Lord keeps safe from danger all those who are true to him, and gives the workers of pride their right reward.
Put away fear and let your heart be strong, all you whose hope is in the Lord.Of David. Maschil.
Happy is he who has forgiveness for his wrongdoing, and whose sin is covered.
Happy is the man in whom the Lord sees no evil, and in whose spirit there is no deceit.
When I kept my mouth shut, my bones were wasted, because of my crying all through the day.
For the weight of your hand was on me day and night; my body became dry like the earth in summer. (Selah.)
I made my wrongdoing clear to you, and did not keep back my sin. I said, I will put it all before the Lord; and you took away my wrongdoing and my sin. (Selah.)
For this cause let every saint make his prayer to you at a time when you are near: then the overflowing of the great waters will not overtake him.
You are my safe and secret place; you will keep me from trouble; you will put songs of salvation on the lips of those who are round me. (Selah.)
I will give you knowledge, teaching you the way to go; my eye will be your guide.
Do not be like the horse or the ass, without sense; ...
The sinner will be full of trouble; but mercy will be round the man who has faith in the Lord.
Be glad in the Lord with joy, you upright men; give cries of joy, all you whose hearts are true.Be glad in the Lord, O doers of righteousness; for praise is beautiful for the upright.
Give praise to the Lord on the corded instrument; make melody to him with instruments of music.
Make a new song to him; playing expertly with a loud noise.
For the word of the Lord is upright, and all his works are certain.
His delight is in righteousness and wisdom; the earth is full of the mercy of the Lord.
By the word of the Lord were the heavens made; and all the army of heaven by the breath of his mouth.
He makes the waters of the sea come together in a mass; he keeps the deep seas in store-houses.
Let the earth be full of the fear of the Lord; let all the people of the world be in holy fear of him.
For he gave the word, and it was done; by his order it was fixed for ever.
The Lord undoes the designs of the nations; he makes the thoughts of the peoples without effect.
TheLord'spurposeiseternal, thedesignsofhisheartgoonthroughallthegenerations of man.
Happy is the nation whose God is the Lord; and the people whom he has taken for his heritage.
The Lord is looking down from heaven; he sees all the sons of men;
From his house he keeps watch on all who are living on the earth;
He makes all their hearts; their works are clear to him.
A king's salvation is not in the power of his army; a strong man does not get free by his great strength.
A horse is a false hope; his great power will not make any man free from danger.
See, the eye of the Lord is on those in whose hearts is the fear of him, on those whose hope is in his mercy;
To keep their souls from death; and to keep them living in time of need.
Our souls are waiting for the Lord; he is our help and our salvation.
For in him our hearts have joy; in his holy name is our hope.
Let your mercy be on us, O Lord, as we are waiting for you.Of David. When he made a change in his behaviour before Abimelech, who sent him away, and he went.
I will be blessing the Lord at all times; his praise will be ever in my mouth.
My soul will say great things of the Lord: the poor in spirit will have knowledge of it and be glad.
O give praise to the Lord with me; let us be witnesses together of his great name.
I was searching for the Lord, and he gave ear to my voice, and made me free from all my fears.
Let your eyes be turned to him and you will have light, and your faces will not be shamed.
This poor man's cry came before the Lord, and he gave him salvation from all his troubles.
The angel of the Lord is ever watching over those who have fear of him, to keep them safe.
By experience you will see that the Lord is good; happy is the man who has faith in him.
Keep yourselves in the fear of the Lord, all you his saints; for those who do so will have no need of anything.
The young lions are in need and have no food; but those who are looking to the Lord will have every good thing.
Come, children, give attention to me; I will be your teacher in the fear of the Lord.
What man has a love of life, and a desire that his days may be increased so that he may see good?
Keep your tongue from evil, and your lips from words of deceit.
Be turned from evil, and do good; make a search for peace, desiring it with all your heart.
The eyes of the Lord are on the upright, and his ears are open to their cry.
The face of the Lord is against those who do evil, to take away the memory of them from the earth.
The cry of the upright comes before the Lord, and he takes them out of all their troubles.
The Lord is near the broken-hearted; he is the saviour of those whose spirits are crushed down.
Great are the troubles of the upright: but the Lord takes him safely out of them all.
He keeps all his bones: not one of them is broken.
Evil will put an end to the sinner, and those who are haters of righteousness will come to destruction.
The Lord will be the saviour of the souls of his servants, and no one who has faith in him will be put to shame.Of David.
O Lord, be on my side against those who are judging me; be at war with those who make war against me.
Be a breastplate to me, and give me your help.
Take up your spear and keep back my attackers; say to my soul, I am your salvation.
Let them be overcome and put to shame who make attempts to take my soul; let those who would do me damage be turned back and made foolish.
Let them be like dust from the grain before the wind; let the angel of the Lord send them in flight.
Let their way be dark and full of danger; let them be troubled by the angel of the Lord.
For without cause they have put a net ready for me secretly, in which to take my soul.
Let destruction come on them without their knowledge; let them be taken themselves in their secret nets, falling into the same destruction.
And my soul will have joy in the Lord; it will be glad in his salvation.
All my bones will say, Lord, who is like you? The saviour of the poor man from the hands of the strong, of him who is poor and in need from him who takes his goods.
False witnesses got up: they put questions to me about crimes of which I had no knowledge.
They gave me back evil for good, troubling my soul.
But as for me, when they were ill I put on the clothing of sorrow: I went without food and was sad, and my prayer came back again to my heart.
My behaviour was as if it had been my friend or my brother: I was bent low in grief like one whose mother is dead.
But they took pleasure in my trouble, and came together, yes, low persons came together against me without my knowledge; they never came to an end of wounding me.
Like men of deceit they put me to shame; the voice of their wrath was loud against me.
Lord, how long will you be looking on? take my soul from their destruction, my life from the lions.
I will give you praise in the great meeting; I will give you honour among a strong people.
Do not let my haters be glad over me falsely; let not those who are against me without cause make sport of me.
Fortheydonotsaywordsofpeace; intheirdeceittheyaredesigningevilthingsagainst the quiet ones in the land.
Their mouths were open wide against me, and they said, Aha, aha, our eyes have seen it.
You have seen this, O Lord; be not unmoved: O Lord, be not far from me.
Be awake, O Lord, be moved to take up my cause, my God and my Lord.
Be my judge, O Lord my God, in your righteousness; do not let them be glad over me.
Let them not say in their hearts, So we will have it: let them not say, We have put an end to him.
Let all those who take pleasure in my troubles be shamed and come to nothing: let those who are lifted up against me be covered with shame and have no honour.
Let those who are on my side give cries of joy; let them ever say, The Lord be praised, for he has pleasure in the peace of his servant.
And my tongue will be talking of your righteousness and of your praise all the day.To the chief music-maker. Of the servant of the Lord. Of David.
The sin of the evil-doer says in his heart, There is no fear of the Lord before his eyes.
For he takes comfort in the thought that his sin will not be uncovered and hated.
In the words of his mouth are evil and deceit; he has given up being wise and doing good.
He gives thought to evil on his bed; he takes a way which is not good; he is not a hater of evil.
Your mercy, O Lord, is in the heavens, and your strong purpose is as high as the clouds.
Your righteousness is like the mountains of God; your judging is like the great deep; O Lord, you give life to man and beast.
How good is your loving mercy, O God! the children of men take cover under the shade of your wings.
The delights of your house will be showered on them; you will give them drink from the river of your pleasures.
For with you is the fountain of life: in your light we will see light.
O let there be no end to your loving mercy to those who have knowledge of you, or of your righteousness to the upright in heart.
Let not the foot of pride come against me, or the hand of the evil-doers put me out of my place.
There the workers of evil have come down: they have been made low, and will not be lifted up.Of David.
Do not be angry because of the wrongdoers, or have envy of the workers of evil.
For they will quickly be cut down like grass, and become dry like the green plants.
Have faith in the Lord, and do good; be at rest in the land, and go after righteousness.
So will your delight be in the Lord, and he will give you your heart's desires.
Put your life in the hands of the Lord; have faith in him and he will do it.
And he will make your righteousness be seen like the light, and your cause like the shining of the sun.
Take your rest in the Lord, waiting quietly for him; do not be angry because of the man who does well in his evil ways, and gives effect to his bad designs.
Put an end to your wrath and be no longer bitter; do not give way to angry feeling which is a cause of sin.
For the evil-doers will be cut off: but those who have faith in the Lord will have the earth for their heritage.
For in a short time the evil-doer will be gone: you will go searching for his place, and it will not be there.
But the gentle will have the earth for their heritage; they will take their delight in peace without measure.
The sinner has evil designs against the upright, lifting up the voice of wrath against him.
He will be laughed at by the Lord, who sees that his day is coming.
The evil-doers have taken out their swords, their bows are bent; for crushing the poor, and to put to death those who are upright in their ways.
But their swords will be turned into their hearts, and their bows will be broken.
The little which the good man has is better than the wealth of evil-doers.
For the arms of the evil-doers will be broken: but the Lord is the support of the good.
The days of the upright are numbered by the Lord, and their heritage will be for ever.
They will not be shamed in the evil time, and in the days when all are in need of food they will have enough.
But the wrongdoers will come to destruction, and the haters of the Lord will be like the fat of lambs, they will be burned up; they will go up in smoke, and never again be seen.
The sinner takes money and does not give it back; but the upright man has mercy, and gives to others.
Those who have his blessing will have the earth for their heritage; but those who are cursed by him will be cut off.
The steps of a good man are ordered by the Lord, and he takes delight in his way.
Even if he has a fall he will not be without help: for the hand of the Lord is supporting him.
I have been young, and now am old, but I have not seen the good man without help, or his children looking for bread.
All the day he is ready to have mercy and to give; his children are a blessing.
Be turned from evil, and do good; and your place will be for ever.
For the Lord is a lover of righteousness, and takes care of his saints; they will be kept safe for ever; but the seed of the evil-doers will be cut off.
The upright will have the earth for their heritage, and will go on living there for ever.
The mouth of the good man says words of wisdom; the talk of his tongue is of righteousness.
The law of his God is in his heart; he will never make a false step.
The sinners are watching the upright man, desiring to put him to death.
The Lord will not give him into their hands, or be against him when he is judged.
Be waiting for the Lord, and keep his way; and you will be lifted up, and have the land for your heritage: when the evil-doers are cut off, you will see it.
I have seen the evil-doer in great power, covering the earth like a great tree.
But he came to an end, and there was no sign of him; I made a search for him and he was not there.
Give attention to the good man, and take note of the upright; because the end of that man is peace.
But as for the sinners, they will be cut off together; the end of the wrongdoers is destruction.
But the Lord is the saviour of the upright: he is their strength in the time of trouble.
And the Lord will be their help, and keep them safe: he will take them out of the hands of the evil-doers, and be their saviour, because they had faith in him.A Psalm. Of David. To keep in memory.
O Lord, be not bitter with me in your wrath; let not your hand be on me in the heat of your passion.
For your arrows have gone into my flesh, and I am crushed under the weight of your hand.
My flesh is wasted because of your wrath; and there is no peace in my bones because of my sin.
For my crimes have gone over my head; they are like a great weight which is more than my strength.
My wounds are poisoned and evil-smelling, because of my foolish behaviour.
I am troubled, I am made low; I go weeping all the day.
For my body is full of burning; all my flesh is unhealthy.
I am feeble and crushed down; I gave a cry like a lion because of the grief in my heart.
Lord, all my desire is before you; my sorrow is not kept secret from you.
My heart goes out in pain, my strength is wasting away; as for the light of my eyes, it is gone from me.
My lovers and my friends keep away from my disease; my relations keep far away.
Those who have a desire to take my life put nets for me; those who are designing my destruction say evil things against me, all the day their minds are full of deceit.
But I kept my ears shut like a man without hearing; like a man without a voice, never opening his mouth.
So I was like a man whose ears are shut, and in whose mouth there are no sharp words.
In you, O Lord, is my hope: you will give me an answer, O Lord, my God.
I said, Let them not be glad over me; when my foot is moved, let them not be lifted up with pride against me.
My feet are near to falling, and my sorrow is ever before me.
I will make clear my wrongdoing, with sorrow in my heart for my sin.
But they are strong who have hate for me without cause: those who are against me falsely are increased in numbers.
They give me back evil for good; they are my haters because I go after the thing which is right.
Do not give me up, O Lord; O my God, be near to me.
Come quickly to give me help, O Lord, my salvation.To the chief music-maker. Of Jeduthun. A Psalm. Of David.
I said, I will give attention to my ways, so that my tongue may do no wrong; I will keep my mouth under control, while the sinner is before me.
I made no sound, I said no word, even of good; and I was moved with sorrow.
My heart was burning in my breast; while I was deep in thought the fire was lighted; then I said with my tongue,
Lord, give me knowledge of my end, and of the measure of my days, so that I may see how feeble I am.
You have made my days no longer than a hand's measure; and my years are nothing in your eyes; truly, every man is but a breath. (Selah.)
Truly, every man goes on his way like an image; he is troubled for no purpose: he makes a great store of wealth, and has no knowledge of who will get it.
And now, Lord, what am I waiting for? my hope is in you.
Make me free from all my sins; do not let me be shamed by the man of evil behaviour.
I was quiet, and kept my mouth shut; because you had done it.
No longer let your hand be hard on me; I am wasted by the blows of your hand.
By the weight of your wrath against man's sin, the glory of his form is wasted away; truly every man is but a breath. (Selah.)
Let my prayer come to your ears, O Lord, and give attention to my cry, make an answer to my weeping: for my time here is short before you, and in a little time I will be gone, like all my fathers.
Let your wrath be turned away from me, so that I may be comforted, before I go away from here, and become nothing.To the chief music-maker. Of David. A Psalm.
When I was waiting quietly for the Lord, his heart was turned to me, and he gave ear to my cry.
He took me up out of a deep waste place, out of the soft and sticky earth; he put my feet on a rock, and made my steps certain.
And he put a new song in my mouth, even praise to our God; numbers have seen it with fear, and put their faith in the Lord.
Happy is the man who has faith in the Lord, and does not give honour to the men of pride or to those who are turned away to deceit.
O Lord my God, great are the wonders which you have done in your thought for us; it is not possible to put them out in order before you; when I would give an account of them, their number is greater than I may say.
You had no desire for offerings of beasts or fruits of the earth; ears you made for me: for burned offerings and sin offerings you made no request.
Then I said, See, I come; it is recorded of me in the roll of the book,
My delight is to do your pleasure, O my God; truly, your law is in my heart.
I have given news of righteousness in the great meeting; O Lord, you have knowledge that I have not kept back my words.
Your righteousness has not been folded away in my heart; I have made clear your true word and your salvation; I have not kept secret your mercy or your faith from the great meeting.
Take not away your gentle mercies from me, O Lord; let your mercy and your faith keep me safe for ever.
For unnumbered evils are round about me; my sins have overtaken me, so that I am bent down with their weight; they are more than the hairs of my head, my strength is gone because of them.
Be pleased, O Lord, to take me out of danger; O Lord, come quickly and give me help.
Let those who go after my soul for its destruction have shame and trouble together; let them be turned back and made foolish who take pleasure in my trouble.
Let those who say to me, Aha, aha! be surprised because of their shame.
Let all those who are looking for you be glad and have joy in you; let the lovers of your salvation ever say, May the Lord be great.
Though I am poor and in need, the Lord has me in mind; you are my help and my saviour; let there be no waiting, O my God.To the chief music-maker. A Psalm. Of David.
Happy is the man who gives thought to the poor; the Lord will be his saviour in the time of trouble.
The Lord will keep him safe, and give him life; the Lord will let him be a blessing on the earth, and will not give him into the hand of his haters.
The Lord will be his support on his bed of pain: by you will all his grief be turned to strength.
I said, Lord, have mercy on me; make my soul well, because my faith is in you.
My haters say evil against me, When will he be dead, and his name come to an end?
If one comes to see me, deceit is in his heart; he keeps a store of evil, which he makes public in every place.
All my haters are talking secretly together against me; they are designing my downfall.
They say, He has an evil disease, which will not let him go: and now that he is down he will not get up again.
Even my dearest friend, in whom I had faith, who took bread with me, is turned against me.
But you, O Lord, have mercy on me, lifting me up, so that I may give them their punishment.
By this I see that you have pleasure in me, because my hater does not overcome me.
And as for me, you are my support in my righteousness, giving me a place before your face for ever.
May the Lord God of Israel be praised, through eternal days and for ever. So be it. So be it.To the chief music-maker. Maschil. Of the sons of Korah.
Like the desire of the roe for the water-streams, so is my soul's desire for you, O God.
My soul is dry for need of God, the living God; when may I come and see the face of God?
My tears have been my food day and night, while they keep saying to me, Where is your God?
Let my soul be overflowing with grief when these things come back to my mind, how I went in company to the house of God, with the voice of joy and praise, with the song of those who were keeping the feast.
Why are you crushed down, O my soul? and why are you troubled in me? put your hope in God; for I will again give him praise who is my help and my God.
My soul is crushed down in me, so I will keep you in mind; from the land of Jordan and of the Hermons, from the hill Mizar.
Deepissoundingto deepatthenoiseofyourwaterfalls; allyourwaveshavegonerolling over me.
But the Lord will send his mercy in the daytime, and in the night his song will be with me, a prayer to the God of my life.
I will say to God my Rock, Why have you let me go from your memory? why do I go in sorrow because of the attacks of my haters?
The cruel words of my haters are like a crushing of my bones; when they say to me every day, Where is your God?
Why are you crushed down, O my soul? and why are you troubled in me? put your hope in God; for I will again give him praise who is my help and my God.Be my judge, O God, supporting my cause against a nation without religion; O keep me from the false and evil man.
You are the God of my strength; why have you put me from you? why do I go in sorrow because of the attacks of my haters?
O send out your light and your true word; let them be my guide: let them take me to your holy hill, and to your tents.
Then I will go up to the altar of God, to the God of my joy; I will be glad and give praise to you on an instrument of music, O God, my God.
Why are you crushed down, O my soul? and why are you troubled in me? put your hope in God, for I will again give him praise who is my help and my God.To the chief music-maker. Of the sons of Korah Maschil.
It has come to our ears, O God, our fathers have given us the story, of the works which you did in their days, in the old times,
Uprooting the nations with your hand, and planting our fathers in their place; cutting down the nations, but increasing the growth of your people.
For they did not make the land theirs by their swords, and it was not their arms which kept them safe; but your right hand, and your arm, and the light of your face, because you had pleasure in them.
You are my King and my God; ordering salvation for Jacob.
Through you will we overcome our haters; by your name will they be crushed under our feet who are violent against us.
I will not put faith in my bow, my sword will not be my salvation.
But it is you who have been our saviour from those who were against us, and have put to shame those who had hate for us.
Our pride is in God at all times, to his name we give praise for ever. (Selah.)
But now you have sent us away from you, and put us to shame; you do not go out with our armies.
Because of this we are turned back by the attacker: those who have hate for us take our goods for themselves.
You have made us like sheep which are taken for meat; we are put to flight among the nations.
You let your people go for nothing; your wealth is not increased by their price.
You have made us to be looked down on by our neighbours, we are laughed at and shamed by those who are round about us.
Our name is a word of shame among the nations, a sign for the shaking of heads among the peoples.
My downfall is ever before me, and I am covered with the shame of my face;
Because of the voice of him who says sharp and bitter words; because of the hater and him who is the instrument of punishment.
All this has come on us, but still we have kept you in our memory; and we have not been false to your word.
Our hearts have not gone back, and our steps have not been turned out of your way;
Though you have let us be crushed in the place of jackals, though we are covered with darkest shade.
If the name of our God has gone out of our minds, or if our hands have been stretched out to a strange god,
Will not God make search for it? for he sees the secrets of the heart.
Truly, because of you we are put to death every day; we are numbered like sheep for destruction.
Why are you sleeping, O Lord? awake! and come to our help, do not give us up for ever.
Why is your face covered, and why do you give no thought to our trouble and our cruel fate?
For our souls are crushed down to the dust: our bodies are stretched out on the earth.
Up! and come to our help, and give us salvation because of your mercy.To the chief music-maker; put to Shoshannim. Of the sons of Korah. Maschil. A Song of loves.
My heart is flowing over with good things; my words are of that which I have made for a king; my tongue is the pen of a ready writer.
You are fairer than the children of men; grace is flowing through your lips; for this cause the blessing of God is with you for ever.
Put on your sword, make it ready at your side, O strong chief, with your glory and power.
And go nobly on in your power, because you are good and true and without pride; and your right hand will be teaching you things of fear.
Your arrows are sharp in the heart of the king's haters; because of them the peoples are falling under you.
Your seat of power, O God, is for ever and ever; the rod of your kingdom is a rod of honour.
You have been a lover of righteousness and a hater of evil: and so God, your God, has put the oil of joy on your head, lifting you high over all other kings.
Your robes are full of the smell of all sorts of perfumes and spices; music from the king's ivory houses has made you glad.
Kings' daughters are among your noble women: on your right is the queen in gold of Ophir.
O daughter, give thought and attention, and let your ear be open; no longer keep in mind your people, and your father's house;
So will the king have a great desire for you, seeing how beautiful you are; because he is your lord, give him honour.
And the daughtersof Tyre will be there with an offering; those who have wealth among the people will be looking for your approval.
In the great house the king's daughter is all shining: her clothing is worked with gold.
She will come before the king in robes of needlework; the virgins in her train will come before you.
With joy and rapture will they come; they will go into the king's house.
Your children will take the place of your fathers; so that you may make them rulers over all the earth.
I will keep the memory of your name living through all generations; and because of this the people will give you praise for ever.To the chief music-maker. Of the sons of Korah; put to Alamoth. A Song.
God is our harbour and our strength, a very present help in trouble.
For this cause we will have no fear, even though the earth is changed, and though the mountains are moved in the heart of the sea;
Though its waters are sounding and troubled, and though the mountains are shaking with their violent motion. (Selah.)
There is a river whose streams make glad the resting-place of God, the holy place of the tents of the Most High.
God has taken his place in her; she will not be moved: he will come to her help at the dawn of morning.
The nations were angry, the kingdoms were moved; at the sound of his voice the earth became like wax.
The Lord of armies is with us; the God of Jacob is our high tower. (Selah.)
Come, see the works of the Lord, the destruction which he has made in the earth.
He puts an end to wars over all the earth; by him the bow is broken, and the spear cut in two, and the carriage burned in the fire.
Be at peace in the knowledge that I am God: I will be lifted up among the nations, I will be honoured through all the earth.
The Lord of armies is with us; the God of Jacob is our high tower. (Selah.)To the chief music-maker. A Psalm. Of the sons of Korah.
O make a glad noise with your hands, all you peoples; letting your voices go up to God with joy.
For the Lord Most High is to be feared; he is a great King over all the earth.
He will put down the peoples under us, and the nations under our feet.
He will give us our heritage, the glory of Jacob who is dear to him. (Selah.)
God has gone up with a glad cry, the Lord with the sound of the horn.
Give praises to God, make songs of praise; give praises to our King, make songs of praise.
For God is the King of all the earth; make songs of praise with knowledge.
God is the ruler over the nations; God is on the high seat of his holy rule.
The rulers of the peoples have come together, with the people of the God of Abraham; because the powers of the earth are God's: he is lifted up on high.A Song. A Psalm. Of the sons of Korah.
Great is the Lord and greatly to be praised, in the town of our God, in his holy mountain.
Beautiful in its high position, the joy of all the earth, is the mountain of Zion, the mountain of God, the town of the great King.
In its buildings God is seen to be a high tower.
For see! the kings came together by agreement, they were joined together.
They saw it, and so were full of wonder; they were troubled, and went quickly away in fear.
Shaking came on them and pain, as on a woman in childbirth.
By you the ships of Tarshish are broken as by an east wind.
As it came to our ears so have we seen it, in the town of the Lord of armies, in the town of our God; God will keep it fixed for ever. (Selah.)
Our thoughts were of your mercy, O God, while we were in your Temple.
As your name is, O God, so is your praise to the ends of the earth; your right hand is full of righteousness.
Let there be joy in the mountain of Zion, and let the daughters of Judah be glad, because of your wise decisions.
Make your way about Zion, and go round it, numbering its towers.
Take note of its strong walls, looking well at its fair buildings; so that you may give word of it to the generation which comes after.
Because this God is our God for ever and ever: he will be our guide.Alamoth. To the chief music-maker. Of the sons of Korah. A Psalm.
Give attention to this, all you peoples; let your ears be open, all you who are living in the world.
High and low together, the poor, and those who have wealth.
From my mouth will come words of wisdom; and in the thoughts of my heart will be knowledge.
I will put my teaching into a story; I will make my dark sayings clear with music.
What cause have I for fear in the days of evil, when the evil-doing of those who are working for my downfall is round about me?
Even of those whose faith is in their wealth, and whose hearts are lifted up because of their stores.
Truly, no man may get back his soul for a price, or give to God the payment for himself;
(Because it takes a great price to keep his soul from death, and man is not able to give it.)
So that he might have eternal life, and never see the underworld.
For he sees that wise men come to their end, and foolish persons of low behaviour come to destruction together, letting their wealth go to others.
The place of the dead is their house for ever, and their resting-place through all generations; those who come after them give their names to their lands.
But man, like the animals, does not go on for ever; he comes to an end like the beasts.
This is the way of the foolish; their silver is for those who come after them, and their children get the pleasure of their gold. (Selah.)
Death will give them their food like sheep; the underworld is their fate and they will go down into it; their flesh is food for worms; their form is wasted away; the underworld is their resting-place for ever.
But God will get back my soul; for he will take me from the power of death. (Selah.)
Have no fear when wealth comes to a man, and the glory of his house is increased;
For at his death, he will take nothing away; his glory will not go down after him.
Though he might have pride in his soul in his life-time, and men will give you praise if you do well for yourself,
He will go to the generation of his fathers; he will not see the light again.
Man, like the animals, does not go on for ever; he comes to an end like the beasts.A Psalm. Of Asaph.
The God of gods, even the Lord, has sent out his voice, and the earth is full of fear; from the coming up of the sun to its going down.
From Zion, most beautiful of places, God has sent out his light.
Our God will come, and will not keep quiet; with fire burning before him, and storm- winds round him.
His voice will go out to the heavens and to the earth, for the judging of his people:
Let my saints come together to me; those who have made an agreement with me by offerings.
And let the heavens make clear his righteousness; for God himself is the judge. (Selah.)
Give ear, O my people, to my words; O Israel, I will be a witness against you; I am God, even your God.
I will not take up a cause against you because of your offerings, or because of your burned offerings, which are ever before me.
I will take no ox out of your house, or he-goats from your flocks;
For every beast of the woodland is mine, and the cattle on a thousand hills.
I see all the birds of the mountains, and the beasts of the field are mine.
If I had need of food, I would not give you word of it; for the earth is mine and all its wealth.
Am I to take the flesh of the ox for my food, or the blood of goats for my drink?
Make an offering of praise to God; keep the agreements which you have made with the Most High;
Let your voice come up to me in the day of trouble; I will be your saviour, so that you may give glory to me.
But to the sinner, God says, What are you doing, talking of my laws, or taking the words of my agreement in your mouth?
Seeing that you have no desire for my teaching, turning your back on my words.
When you saw a thief, you were in agreement with him, and you were joined with those who took other men's wives.
You have given your mouth to evil, your tongue to words of deceit.
You say evil of your brother; you make false statements against your mother's son.
These things have you done, and I said nothing; it seemed to you that I was such a one as yourself; but I will make a protest against you, and put them in order before your eyes.
Now keep this in mind, you who have no memory of God, for fear that you may be crushed under my hand, with no one to give you help:
Whoever makes an offering of praise gives glory to me; and to him who is upright in his ways I will make clear the salvation of God.To the chief music-maker. A Psalm. Of David. When Nathan the prophet came to him, after he had gone in to Bath-sheba.
Have pity on me, O God, in your mercy; out of a full heart, take away my sin.
Let all my wrongdoing be washed away, and make me clean from evil.
For I am conscious of my error; my sin is ever before me.
Against you, you only, have I done wrong, working that which is evil in your eyes; so that your words may be seen to be right, and you may be clear when you are judging.
Truly, I was formed in evil, and in sin did my mother give me birth.
Your desire is for what is true in the inner parts: in the secrets of my soul you will give me knowledge of wisdom.
Make me free from sin with hyssop: let me be washed whiter than snow.
Make me full of joy and rapture; so that the bones which have been broken may be glad.
Let your face be turned from my wrongdoing, and take away all my sins.
Make a clean heart in me, O God; give me a right spirit again.
Do not put me away from before you, or take your holy spirit from me.
Give me back the joy of your salvation; let a free spirit be my support.
Then will I make your ways clear to wrongdoers; and sinners will be turned to you.
Be my saviour from violent death, O God, the God of my salvation; and my tongue will give praise to your righteousness.
O Lord, let my lips be open, so that my mouth may make clear your praise.
You have no desire for an offering or I would give it; you have no delight in burned offerings.
The offerings of God are a broken spirit; a broken and sorrowing heart, O God, you will not put from you.
Do good to Zion in your good pleasure, building up the walls of Jerusalem.
Then you will have delight in the offerings of righteousness, in burned offerings and offerings of beasts; then they will make offerings of oxen on your altar.To the chief music-maker. Maschil. Of David. When Doeg the Edomite came to Saul saying, David has come to the house of Ahimelech.
Why do you take pride in wrongdoing, lifting yourself up against the upright man all the day?
Purposing destruction, using deceit; your tongue is like a sharp blade.
You have more love for evil than for good, for deceit than for works of righteousness. (Selah.)
Destruction is in all your words, O false tongue.
But God will put an end to you for ever; driving you out from your tent, uprooting you from the land of the living. (Selah.)
The upright will see it with fear, and will say, laughing at you:
See, this is the man who did not make God his strength, but had faith in his goods and his property, and made himself strong in his wealth.
But I am like a branching olive-tree in the house of God; I have put my faith in his mercy for ever and ever.
I will give you praise without end for what you have done; I will give honour to your name before your saints, for it is good.To the chief music-maker; put to Mahalath. Maschil. Of David.
The foolish man has said in his heart, God will not do anything. They are unclean, they have done evil works; there is not one who does good.
God was looking down from heaven on the children of men, to see if there were any who had wisdom, searching after God.
Every one of them has gone back; they are unclean: there is not one who does good, no, not one.
Have the workers of evil no knowledge? they take my people for food, as they would take bread; they make no prayer to God.
They were in great fear, where there was no cause for fear: for the bones of those who make war on you have been broken by God; you have put them to shame, because God has no desire for them.
May the salvation of Israel come out of Zion! When the fate of his people is changed by God, Jacob will have joy, and Israel will be glad.To the chief music-maker; on Neginoth. Maschil. Of David. When the Ziphites came and said to Saul, Is not David keeping himself secret among us?
Let your name be my salvation, O God; let my cause be judged by your strength.
Let my prayer come before you, O God; give ear to the words of my mouth.
For men who are going after me have come out against me, violent men are purposing to take my soul; they have not put God before their eyes. (Selah.)
See, God is my helper: the Lord is the great supporter of my soul.
Let the evil works of my haters come back on them again; let them be cut off by your good faith.
Freely will I make my offerings to you; I will give praise to your name, O Lord, for it is good.
Because it has been my saviour from all my trouble; and my eyes have seen the punishment of my haters.To the chief music-maker, on Neginoth. Maschil. Of David.
Give hearing to my prayer, O God; and let not your ear be shut against my request.
Give thought to me, and let my prayer be answered: I have been made low in sorrow;
I am troubled because of the voice of the cruel ones, because of the loud cry of the evil-doers; for they put a weight of evil on me, and they are cruel in their hate for me.
My heart is deeply wounded, and the fear of death has come on me.
Fear and shaking have come over me, with deep fear I am covered.
And I said, If only I had wings like a dove! for then I would go in flight from here and be at rest.
I would go wandering far away, living in the waste land. (Selah.)
I would quickly take cover from the driving storm and from the violent wind.
Send destruction on them, O Lord, make a division of tongues among them: for I have seen fighting and violent acts in the town.
By day and night they go round the town, on the walls; trouble and sorrow are in the heart of it.
Evil is there; cruel rule and deceit are ever in the streets.
For it was not my hater who said evil of me; that would have been no grief to me; it was not one outside the number of my friends who made himself strong against me, or I would have kept myself from him in a secret place;
But it was you, my equal, my guide, my well-loved friend.
We had loving talk together, and went to the house of God in company.
Let the hand of death come on them suddenly, and let them go down living into the underworld; because evil is in their houses and in their hearts.
As for me, I will make my prayer to God, and he will be my saviour.
In the evening and in the morning and in the middle of the day I will make my prayer with sounds of grief; and my voice will come to his ears.
He has taken my soul away from the attack which was made against me, and given it peace; for great numbers were against me.
God will give thought to me; he who from early times is strong will send pain and trouble on them. (Selah.) Because they are unchanged, they have no fear of God.
He has put out his hand against those who were at peace with him; he has not kept his agreement.
The words of his mouth were smoother than butter, but war was in his heart; his words were softer than oil, but they were sharp swords.
Put your cares on the Lord, and he will be your support; he will not let the upright man be moved.
But you, O God, will send them down into the underworld; the cruel and the false will be cut off before half their days are ended; but I will have faith in you.To the chief music-maker; put to Jonath elem rehokim. Of David. Michtam. When the Philistines took him in Gath.
Have mercy on me, O God, for man is attempting my destruction; every day he makes cruel attacks against me.
My haters are ever ready to put an end to me; great numbers are lifting themselves up against me.
In the time of my fear, I will have faith in you.
In God will I give praise to his word; in God have I put my hope; I will have no fear of what flesh may do to me.
Every day they make wrong use of my words; all their thoughts are against me for evil.
They come together, they are waiting in secret places, they take note of my steps, they are waiting for my soul.
By evil-doing they will not get free from punishment. In wrath, O God, let the peoples be made low.
You have seen my wanderings; put the drops from my eyes into your bottle; are they not in your record?
When I send up my cry to you, my haters will be turned back; I am certain of this, for God is with me.
In God will I give praise to his word; in the Lord will I give praise to his word.
In God have I put my hope, I will have no fear of what man may do to me.
I keep the memory of my debt to you, O God; I will give you the offerings of praise.
Becauseyouhavetakenmysoulfromthepowerofdeath; andkeptmyfeetfromfalling, so that I may be walking before God in the light of life.To the chief music-maker; put to Al-tashheth. Michtam. Of David. When he went in flight from Saul, in the hole of the rock.
Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me; for the hope of my soul is in you: I will keep myself safely under the shade of your wings, till these troubles are past.
I will send up my cry to the Most High God; to God who does all things for me.
He will send from heaven, and take me from the power of him whose desire is for my destruction. God will send out his mercy and his good faith.
My soul is among lions; I am stretched out among those who are on fire, even the sons of men, whose teeth are spears and arrows, and whose tongue is a sharp sword.
O God, be lifted up higher than the heavens; let your glory be over all the earth.
They have made ready a net for my steps; my soul is bent down; they have made a great hole before me, and have gone down into it themselves. (Selah.)
My heart is fixed, O God, my heart is fixed; I will make songs, and give praise.
You are my glory; let the instruments of music be awake; I myself will be awake with the dawn.
I will give you praise, O Lord, among the peoples; I will make songs to you among the nations.
For your mercy is great, stretching up to the heavens, and your righteousness goes up to the clouds.
Be lifted up, O God, higher than the heavens, let your glory be over all the earth.To the chief music-maker; put to Al-tashheth. Michtam. Of David.
Is there righteousness in your mouths, O you gods? are you upright judges, O you sons of men?
The purposes of your hearts are evil; your hands are full of cruel doings on the earth.
The evil-doers are strange from the first; from the hour of their birth they go out of the true way, saying false words.
Their poison is like the poison of a snake; they are like the adder, whose ears are shut;
Who will not be moved by the voice of the wonder-worker, however great are his powers.
O God, let their teeth be broken in their mouths; let the great teeth of the young lions be pulled out, O Lord.
Let them be turned to liquid like the ever-flowing waters; let them be cut off like the grass by the way.
Let them be like an after-birth which is turned to water and comes to an end; like the fruit of a woman who gives birth before her time, let them not see the sun.
Before they are conscious of it, let them be cut down like thorns; let a strong wind take them away like waste growth.
The upright man will be glad when he sees their punishment; his feet will be washed in the blood of the evil-doer.
So that men will say, Truly there is a reward for righteousness; truly there is a God who is judge on the earth.To the chief music-maker; put to At-tashheth. Michtam. Of David. When Saul sent, and they were watching the house, to put him to death.
Take me out of the hands of the cruel ones, O my God; keep me safe from those who come up against me.
Take me out of the power of the workers of evil, and keep me safe from the men of blood.
For see, they are watching in secret for my soul; the strong have come together against me? but not because of my sin, or my evil-doing, O Lord.
For no sin of mine they go quickly and get themselves ready; be awake and come to my help, and see.
You, O Lord God of armies, are the God of Israel; come now and give punishment to the nations; have no mercy on any workers of deceit. (Selah.)
They come back in the evening; they make a noise like a dog, and go round the town.
See, hate is dropping from their lips; curses are on their tongues: they say, Who gives attention to it?
But you are laughing at them, O Lord; you will make sport of all the nations.
O my strength, I will put my hope in you; because God is my strong tower.
The God of my mercy will go before me: God will let me see my desire effected on my haters.
Put them not to death, for so my people will keep the memory of them: let them be sent in all directions by your power; make them low, O Lord our saviour.
Because of the sin of their mouths and the word of their lips, let them even be taken in their pride; and for their curses and their deceit,
Put an end to them in your wrath, put an end to them, so that they may not be seen again; let them see that God is ruling in Jacob and to the ends of the earth. (Selah.)
And in the evening let them come back, and make a noise like a dog, and go round the town.
Let them go wandering up and down in search of food, and be there all night if they have not enough.
But I will make songs of your power; yes, I will give cries of joy for your mercy in the morning; because you have been my strength and my high tower in the day of my trouble.
To you, O my strength, will I make my song: because God is my high tower, even the God of my mercy.To the chief music-maker; put to Shushan-eduth. Michtam. Of David. For teaching. When he was fighting against Aram-naharaim and Aramzobah, when Joab came back, and put twelve thousand of the Edomites to death, in the Valley of Salt.
God, you have put us away from you, you have sent us in all directions, you have been angry; O be turned to us again.
By the power of your hand the earth is shaking and broken; make it strong again, for it is moved.
You have made the people see hard times; you have given us the wine of shaking for our drink.
Give a safe place to those who have fear of you, where they may go in flight from before the bow. (Selah.)
So that your loved ones may be made safe, let your right hand be my salvation, and give me an answer.
God has said in his holy place, I will be glad: I will make a division of Shechem, and the valley of Succoth will be measured out.
Gilead is mine, and Manasseh is mine; and Ephraim is the strength of my head; Judah is my law-giver;
Moab is my washpot; over Edom will I put out my shoe; over Philistia will a glad cry be sounded.
Who will take me into the strong town? who will be my guide into Edom?
Have not you put us away, O God? and you have not gone out with our armies.
Give us help in our trouble; for there is no help in man.
Through God we will do great things, for through him our haters will be crushed under our feet.To the chief music-maker. On a corded instrument. Of David.
Let my cry come to you, O God; let your ears be open to my prayer.
From the end of the earth will I send up my cry to you, when my heart is overcome: take me to the rock which is over-high for me.
For you have been my secret place, and my high tower from those who made war on me.
I will make your tent my resting-place for ever: I will keep myself under the cover of your wings. (Selah.)
For you, O God, have made answer to my prayers; you have given me the heritage of those who give honour to your name.
You will give the king long life; and make his years go on through the generations.
May the seat of his authority be before God for ever; may mercy and righteousness keep him safe.
So will I make songs in praise of your name for ever, giving to God that which is right day by day.To the chief music-maker. After Jeduthun. A Psalm. Of David.
My soul, put all your faith in God; for from him comes my salvation.
He only is my Rock and my salvation; he is my high tower; I will not be greatly moved.
How long will you go on designing evil against a man? running against him as against a broken wall, which is on the point of falling?
Their only thought is to put him down from his place of honour; their delight is in deceit: blessing is in their mouths but cursing in their hearts. (Selah.)
My soul, put all your faith in God; for from him comes my hope.
He only is my Rock and my salvation; he is my high tower; I will not be greatly moved.
In God is my salvation, and my glory; the Rock of my strength, and my safe place.
Have faith in him at all times, you people; let your hearts go flowing out before him: God is our safe place. (Selah.)
Truly men of low birth are nothing, and men of high position are not what they seem; if they are put in the scales together they are less than a breath.
Have no faith in the rewards of evil-doing, or in profits wrongly made: if your wealth is increased, do not put your hopes on it.
Once has God said, twice has it come to my ears, that power is God's:
And mercy, O Lord, is yours, for you give to every man the reward of his work.A Psalm. Of David. When he was in the waste land of Judah.
O God, you are my God; early will I make my search for you: my soul is dry for need of you, my flesh is wasted with desire for you, as a dry and burning land where no water is;
To see your power and your glory, as I have seen you in the holy place.
Because your mercy is better than life, my lips will give you praise.
So will I go on blessing you all my life, lifting up my hands in your name.
My soul will be comforted, as with good food; and my mouth will give you praise with songs of joy;
When the memory of you comes to me on my bed, and when I give thought to you in the night-time.
Because you have been my help, I will have joy in the shade of your wings.
My soul keeps ever near you: your right hand is my support.
But those whose desire is my soul's destruction will go down to the lower parts of the earth.
They will be cut off by the sword; they will be food for foxes.
But the king will have joy in God; everyone who takes an oath by him will have cause for pride; but the false mouth will be stopped.To the chief music-maker. A Psalm. Of David.
O God, let the voice of my grief come to your ear: keep my life from the fear of those who are against me.
Keep me safe from the secret purpose of wrongdoers; from the band of the workers of evil;
Who make their tongues sharp like a sword, and whose arrows are pointed, even bitter words;
So that in secret they may let loose their arrows at the upright, suddenly and unseen.
They make themselves strong in an evil purpose; they make holes for secret nets; they say, Who will see it,
Or make discovery of our secret purpose? The design is framed with care; and the inner thought of a man, and his heart, is deep.
But God sends out an arrow against them; suddenly they are wounded.
The evil of their tongues is the cause of their fall; all those who see them are shaking their heads at them.
And in fear men make public the works of God; and giving thought to his acts they get wisdom.
The upright will be glad in the Lord and have hope in him; and all the lovers of righteousness will give him glory.To the chief music-maker. A Psalm. Of David. A Song.
It is right for you, O God, to have praise in Zion: to you let the offering be made.
To you, O hearer of prayer, let the words of all flesh come.
Evils have overcome us: but as for our sins, you will take them away.
Happy is the man of your selection, to whom you give a resting-place in your house; we will be full of the good things out of your holy place.
You will give us an answer in righteousness by great acts of power, O God of our salvation; you who are the hope of all the ends of the earth, and of the far-off lands of the sea;
The God by whose strength the mountains are fixed; who is robed with power:
Who makes the loud voice of the sea quiet, and puts an end to the sound of its waves.
Those in the farthest parts of the earth have fear when they see your signs: the outgoings of the morning and evening are glad because of you.
You have given your blessing to the earth, watering it and making it fertile; the river of God is full of water: and having made it ready, you give men grain.
You make the ploughed lands full of water; you make smooth the slopes: you make the earth soft with showers, sending your blessing on its growth.
The year is crowned with the good you give; life-giving rain is dropping from your footsteps,
Falling on the grass of the waste land: and the little hills are glad on every side.
The grass-land is thick with flocks; the valleys are full of grain; they give glad cries and songs of joy.To the chief music-maker. A Song. A Psalm.
Send up a glad cry to God, all the earth:
Make a song in honour of his name: give praise and glory to him.
Say to God, How greatly to be feared are your works! because of your great power your haters are forced to put themselves under your feet.
Let all the earth give you worship, and make songs to you; let them make songs to your name. (Selah.)
Come and see the works of God: he is to be feared in all he does to the children of men.
The sea was turned into dry land: they went through the river on foot: there did we have joy in him.
He is ruling in power for ever; his eyes are watching the nations: may his haters have no strength against him. (Selah.)
Give blessings to our God, O you peoples, let the voice of his praise be loud;
Because he gives us life, and has not let our feet be moved.
For you, O God, have put us to the test: testing us by fire like silver.
You let us be put in prison; chains were put on our legs.
You let men go driving over our heads; we went through fire and through water; but you took us out into a wide place.
I will come into your house with burned offerings, I will make payment of my debt to you,
Keeping the word which came from my lips, and which my mouth said, when I was in trouble.
I will give you burned offerings of fat beasts, and the smoke of sheep; I will make offerings of oxen and goats. (Selah.)
Come, give ear to me, all you God-fearing men, so that I may make clear to you what he has done for my soul.
My voice went up to him, and I was lifted up from the underworld.
I said in my heart, The Lord will not give ear to me:
But truly God's ear has been open; he has give attention to the voice of my prayer.
Praise be to God who has not taken away his good faith and his mercy from me.To the chief music-maker. With corded instruments. A Psalm. A Song.
May God give us mercy and blessing, and let the light of his face be shining on us; (Selah.)
So that men may see your way on the earth, and your salvation among all nations.
Let the peoples give you praise, O God; let all the peoples give you praise.
O let the nations be glad, and make song of joy; for you will be the judge of the peoples in righteousness, guiding the nations of the earth. (Selah.)
Let the peoples give you praise, O God; let all the peoples give you praise.
The earth has given her increase; and God, even our God, will give us his blessing.
God will give us his blessing; so let all the ends of the earth be in fear of him.To the chief music-maker. Of David. A Psalm. A Song.
Let God be seen, and let his haters be put to flight; let those who are against him be turned back before him.
Let them be like smoke before the driving wind; as wax turning soft before the fire, so let them come to an end before the power of God.
But let the upright be glad; let them have delight before God; let them be full of joy.
Make songs to God, make songs of praise to his name; make a way for him who comes through the waste lands; his name is Jah; be glad before him.
A father to those who have no father, a judge of the widows, is God in his holy place.
Those who are without friends, God puts in families; he makes free those who are in chains; but those who are turned away from him are given a dry land.
O God, when you went out before your people, wandering through the waste land; (Selah.)
The earth was shaking and the heavens were streaming, because God was present; even Sinai itself was moved before God, the God of Israel.
You, O God, did freely send the rain, giving strength to the weariness of your heritage.
Those whose resting-place was there, even the poor, were comforted by your good things, O God.
The Lord gives the word; great is the number of the women who make it public.
Kings of armies quickly go in flight: and the women in the houses make a division of their goods.
Will you take your rest among the flocks? like the wings of a dove covered with silver, and its feathers with yellow gold.
When the Most High put the kings to flight, it was as white as snow in Salmon.
A hill of God is the hill of Bashan; a hill with high tops is the hill of Bashan.
Why are you looking with envy, you high hills, on the hill desired by God as his resting- place? truly, God will make it his house for ever.
The war-carriage of God is among Israel's thousands; the Lord has come from Sinai to the holy place.
You have gone up on high, taking your prisoners with you; you have taken offerings from men; the Lord God has taken his place on the seat of his power.
Praise be to the Lord, who is our support day by day, even the God of our salvation. (Selah.)
Our God is for us a God of salvation; his are the ways out of death.
The heads of the haters of God will be crushed; even the head of him who still goes on in his evil ways.
The Lord said, I will make them come back from Bashan, and from the deep parts of the sea;
So that your foot may be red with blood, and the tongues of your dogs with the same.
We see your going, O God: even the going of my God, my King, into the holy place.
The makers of songs go before, the players of music come after, among the young girls playing on brass instruments.
Give praise to God in the great meeting; even the Lord, you who come from the fountain of Israel.
There is little Benjamin ruling them, the chiefs of Judah and their army, the rulers of Zebulun and the rulers of Naphtali.
O God, send out your strength; the strength, O God, with which you have done great things for us,
Out of your Temple in Jerusalem.
Say sharp words to the beast among the water-plants, the band of strong ones, with the lords of the peoples, put an end to the people whose delight is in war.
Kings will give you offerings, they will come out of Egypt; from Pathros will come offerings of silver; Ethiopia will be stretching out her hands to God.
Make songs to God, you kingdoms of the earth; O make songs of praise to the Lord; (Selah.)
To him who goes or the clouds of heaven, the heaven which was from earliest times; he sends out his voice of power.
Make clear that strength is God's: he is lifted up over Israel, and his power is in the clouds.
O God, you are to be feared in your holy place: the God of Israel gives strength and power to his people. Praise be to God.To the chief music-maker; put to Shoshannim. Of David.
Be my saviour, O God; because the waters have come in, even to my neck.
My feet are deep in the soft earth, where there is no support; I have come into deep waters, the waves are flowing over me.
I am tired with my crying; my throat is burning: my eyes are wasted with waiting for my God.
Those who have hate for me without cause are greater in number than the hairs of my head; those who are against me, falsely desiring my destruction, are very strong; I gave back what I had not taken away.
O God, you see how foolish I am; and my wrongdoing is clear to you.
Let not those who have hope in you be put to shame because of me, O Lord God of armies: let not those who are waiting for you be made low because of me, O God of Israel.
I have been wounded with sharp words because of you; my face has been covered with shame.
I have become strange to my brothers, and like a man from a far country to my mother's children.
I am on fire with passion for your house; and the hard things which are said about you have come on me.
My bitter weeping, and my going without food, were turned to my shame.
When I put on the clothing of grief, they said evil of me.
I am a cause of wonder to those in authority; a song to those who are given to strong drink.
But as for me, let my prayer be made to you, O Lord, at a time when you are pleased; O God, give me an answer in your great mercy, for your salvation is certain.
Take me from the grip of the sticky earth, so that I may not go down into it; let me be lifted up from the deep waters.
Let me not be covered by the flowing waters; let not the deep waters go over my head, and let me not be shut up in the underworld.
Give an answer to my words, O Lord; for your mercy is good: be turned to me, because of your great pity.
Let not your face be covered from your servant, for I am in trouble; quickly give me an answer.
Come near to my soul, for its salvation: be my saviour, because of those who are against me.
You have seen my shame, how I was laughed at and made low; my haters are all before you.
My heart is broken by bitter words, I am full of grief; I made a search for some to have pity on me, but there was no one; I had no comforter.
They gave me poison for my food; and bitter wine for my drink.
Let their table before them be for their destruction; let their feasts become a net to take them.
Let their eyes be blind so that they may not see; let their bodies for ever be shaking.
Let your curse come on them; let the heat of your wrath overtake them.
Give their houses to destruction, and let there be no one in their tents.
Because they are cruel to him against whom your hand is turned; they make bitter the grief of him who is wounded by you.
Let their punishment be increased; let them not come into your righteousness.
Let their names be taken from the book of the living, let them not be numbered with the upright.
But I am poor and full of sorrow; let me be lifted up by your salvation, O Lord.
I will give praise to the name of God with a song; I will give glory to him for what he has done.
This will be more pleasing to the Lord than an ox, or a young ox of full growth.
The poor will see it and be glad: you who are lovers of God, let your hearts have life.
For the ears of the Lord are open to the poor, and he takes thought for his prisoners.
Let the heavens and the earth give praise to him, the seas, and everything moving in them.
For God will be the saviour of Zion, and the builder of the towns of Judah; so that it may be their resting-place and heritage.
The seed of his servants will have their part in it, and there the lovers of his name will have rest.To the chief music-maker. Of David. To keep in memory.
Let your salvation come quickly, O God; come quickly to my help, O Lord.
Let those who go after my soul have shame and trouble; let those who have evil designs against me be turned back and made foolish.
Let those who say Aha, aha! be turned back as a reward of their shame.
Let all those who are looking for you be glad and have joy in you; let the lovers of your salvation ever say, May God be great.
But I am poor and in need; come to me quickly, O God; you are my help and my saviour; let there be no waiting, O Lord.In you, O Lord, have I put my hope; let me never be shamed.
Keep me safe in your righteousness, and come to my help; give ear to my voice, and be my saviour.
Be my strong Rock, the strong place of my salvation; for you are my Rock, and my safe place.
O my God, take me out of the hand of the sinner, out of the hand of the evil and cruel man.
For you are my hope, O Lord God; I have had faith in you from the time when I was young.
You have been my support from the day of my birth; you took me out of my mother's body; my praise will be ever of you.
I am a wonder to all; but you are my strong tower.
My mouth will be full of your praise and glory all the day.
Do not give me up when I am old; be my help even when my strength is gone.
For my haters are waiting secretly for me; and those who are watching for my soul are banded together in their evil designs,
Saying, God has given him up; go after him and take him, for he has no helper.
O God, be not far from me; O my God, come quickly to my help.
Let those who say evil against my soul be overcome and put to shame; let my haters be made low and have no honour.
But I will go on ever hoping, and increasing in all your praise.
My mouth will make clear your righteousness and your salvation all the day; for they are more than may be measured.
I will give news of the great acts of the Lord God; my words will be of your righteousness, and of yours only.
O God, you have been my teacher from the time when I was young; and I have been talking of your works of wonder even till now.
Now when I am old and grey-headed, O God, give me not up; till I have made clear your strength to this generation, and your power to all those to come.
Your righteousness, O God, is very high; you have done great things; O God, who is like you?
You, who have sent great and bitter troubles on me, will give me life again, lifting me up from the deep waters of the underworld.
You will make me greater than before, and give me comfort on every side.
I will give praise to you with instruments of music, O my God, for you are true; I will make songs to you with music, O Holy One of Israel.
Joy will be on my lips when I make melody to you; and in my soul, to which you have given salvation.
My tongue will be talking of your righteousness all the day; for those whose purpose is to do me evil have been crushed and put to shame.Of Solomon.
Give the king your authority, O God, and your righteousness to the king's son.
May he be a judge of your people in righteousness, and make true decisions for the poor.
May the mountains give peace to the people, and the hills righteousness.
May he be a judge of the poor among the people, may he give salvation to the children of those who are in need; by him let the violent be crushed.
May his life go on as long as the sun and moon, through all generations.
May he come down like rain on the cut grass; like showers watering the earth.
In his days may the upright do well, living in peace as long as there is a moon in heaven.
Let his kingdom be from sea to sea, from the River to the ends of the earth.
Let those who are against him go down before him; and let his haters be low in the dust.
Let the kings of Tarshish and of the islands come back with offerings; let the kings of Sheba and Seba give of their stores.
Yes, let all kings go down before him; let all nations be his servants.
For he will be a saviour to the poor in answer to his cry; and to him who is in need, without a helper.
He will have pity on the poor, and be the saviour of those who are in need.
He will keep their souls free from evil designs and violent attacks; and their blood will be of value in his eyes.
May he have long life, and may gold from Sheba be given to him: may prayers be made for him at all times; may blessings be on him every day.
May there be wide-stretching fields of grain in the land, shaking on the top of the mountains, full of fruit like Lebanon: may its stems be unnumbered like the grass of the earth.
May his name go on for ever, as long as the sun: may men be blessing themselves by him; may all nations be blessing his name.
Praise be to the Lord God, the God of Israel, the only doer of wonders.
Praise to the glory of his noble name for ever; let all the earth be full of his glory. So be it, So be it.
The prayers of David, the son of Jesse, are ended.A Psalm. Of Asaph.
Truly, God is good to Israel, even to such as are clean in heart.
But as for me, my feet had almost gone from under me; I was near to slipping;
Because of my envy of the men of pride, when I saw the well-being of the wrongdoers.
For they have no pain; their bodies are fat and strong.
They are not in trouble as others are; they have no part in the unhappy fate of men.
For this reason pride is round them like a chain; they are clothed with violent behaviour as with a robe.
Their eyes are bursting with fat; they have more than their heart's desire.
Their thoughts are deep with evil designs; their talk from their seats of power is of cruel acts.
Their mouth goes up to heaven; their tongues go walking through the earth.
For this reason they are full of bread; and water is ever flowing for them.
And they say, How will the Lord see this? is there knowledge in the Most High?
Truly, such are the sinners; they do well at all times, and their wealth is increased.
As for me, I have made my heart clean to no purpose, washing my hands in righteousness;
For I have been troubled all the day; every morning have I undergone punishment.
If I would make clear what it is like, I would say, You are false to the generation of your children.
When my thoughts were turned to see the reason of this, it was a weariness in my eyes;
Till I went into God's holy place, and saw the end of the evil-doers.
You put their feet where there was danger of slipping, so that they go down into destruction.
How suddenly are they wasted! fears are the cause of their destruction.
As a dream when one is awake, they are ended; they are like an image gone out of mind when sleep is over.
My heart was made bitter, and I was pained by the bite of grief:
As for me, I was foolish, and without knowledge; I was like a beast before you.
But still I am ever with you; you have taken me by my right hand.
Your wisdom will be my guide, and later you will put me in a place of honour.
Whom have I in heaven but you? and having you I have no desire for anything on earth.
My flesh and my heart are wasting away: but God is the Rock of my heart and my eternal heritage.
For those who are far away from you will come to destruction: you will put an end to all those who have not kept faith with you.
But it is good for me to come near to God: I have put my faith in the Lord God, so that I may make clear all his works.Maschil. Of Asaph.
Of God, why have you put us away from you for ever? why is the fire of your wrath smoking against the sheep who are your care?
Keep in mind your band of worshippers, for whom you gave payment in the days which are past, whom you took for yourself as the people of your heritage; even this mountain of Zion, which has been your resting-place.
Go up and see the unending destruction; all the evil which your haters have done in the holy place;
Sending out their voices like lions among your worshippers; they have put up their signs to be seen.
They are cutting down, like a man whose blade is lifted up against the thick trees.
Your doors are broken down with hammers and iron blades.
They have put on fire your holy place; they have made the place of your name unclean, pulling it down to the earth.
They have said in their hearts, Let us put an end to them all together; they have given over to the fire all God's places of worship in the land.
We do not see our signs: there is no longer any prophet, or anyone among us to say how long.
O God, how long will those who are against us say cruel things? will the hater go on looking down on your name for ever?
Why are you keeping back your hand, and covering your right hand in your robe?
For from the past God is my King, working salvation in the earth.
The sea was parted in two by your strength; the heads of the great sea-beasts were broken.
The heads of the great snake were crushed by you; you gave them as food to the fishes of the sea.
You made valleys for fountains and springs; you made the ever-flowing rivers dry.
The day is yours and the night is yours: you made the light and the sun.
By you all the limits of the earth were fixed; you have made summer and winter.
Keep this in mind, O Lord, that your haters have said cruel things, and that your name has been looked down on by a people of evil behaviour.
O give not the soul of your dove to the hawk; let not the life of the poor go out of your memory for ever.
Keep in mind your undertaking; for the dark places of the earth are full of pride and cruel acts.
O let not the crushed be turned back in shame; let the low man and the poor give praise to your name.
Up! O God, be the judge of your cause; keep in mind the bitter things which the man of evil behaviour says against you every day.
Keep in mind the voice of your haters; the outcry of those who come against you goes up every day.To the chief music-maker; put to Al-tashheth. A Psalm. Of Asaph. A Song.
To you, O God, we give praise, to you we give praise: and those who give honour to your name make clear your works of power.
When the right time has come, I will be the judge in righteousness.
When the earth and all its people become feeble, I am the support of its pillars. (Selah.)
I say to the men of pride, Let your pride be gone: and to the sinners, Let not your horn be lifted up.
Let not your horn be lifted up: let no more words of pride come from your outstretched necks.
For honour does not come from the east, or from the west, or uplifting from the south;
But God is the judge, putting down one, and lifting up another.
For in the hand of the Lord is a cup, and the wine is red; it is well mixed, overflowing from his hand: he will make all the sinners of the earth take of it, even to the last drop.
But I will ever be full of joy, making songs of praise to the God of Jacob.
By him will all the horns of the sinners be cut off; but the horns of the upright will be lifted up.To the chief music-maker; put to Neginoth. A Psalm. Of Asaph. A Song.
In Judah is the knowledge of God; his name is great in Israel,
In Salem is his tent, his resting-place in Zion.
There were the arrows of the bow broken, there he put an end to body-cover, sword, and fight. (Selah.)
You are shining and full of glory, more than the eternal mountains.
Gone is the wealth of the strong, their last sleep has overcome them; the men of war have become feeble.
At the voice of your wrath, O God of Jacob, deep sleep has overcome carriage and horse.
You, you are to be feared; who may keep his place before you in the time of your wrath?
From heaven you gave your decision; the earth, in its fear, gave no sound,
When God took his place as judge, for the salvation of the poor on the earth. (Selah.)
The ... will give you praise; the rest of ...
Give to the Lord your God what is his by right; let all who are round him give offerings to him who is to be feared.
He puts an end to the wrath of rulers; he is feared by the kings of the earth.To the chief music-maker. After Jeduthun. Of Asaph. A Psalm.
I was crying to God with my voice; even to God with my voice, and he gave ear to me.
In the day of my trouble, my heart was turned to the Lord: my hand was stretched out in the night without resting; my soul would not be comforted.
I will keep God in memory, with sounds of grief; my thoughts are troubled, and my spirit is overcome. (Selah.)
You keep my eyes from sleep; I am so troubled that no words come.
My thoughts go back to the days of the past, to the years which are gone.
The memory of my song comes back to me in the night; my thoughts are moving in my heart; my spirit is searching with care.
Will the Lord put me away for ever? will he be kind no longer?
Is his mercy quite gone for ever? has his word come to nothing?
Has God put away the memory of his pity? are his mercies shut up by his wrath? (Selah.)
And I said, It is a weight on my spirit; but I will keep in mind the years of the right hand of the Most High.
I will keep in mind the works of Jah: I will keep the memory of your wonders in the past.
I will give thought to all your work, while my mind goes over your acts of power.
Your way, O God, is holy: what god is so great as our God?
You are the God who does works of power: you have made your strength clear to the nations.
With your arm you have made your people free, the sons of Jacob and Joseph. (Selah.)
The waters saw you, O God; the waters saw you, they were in fear: even the deep was troubled.
The clouds sent out water; the skies gave out a sound; truly, your arrows went far and wide.
The voice of your thunder went rolling on; the world was flaming with the light of the storm; the earth was shaking.
Your way was in the sea, and your road in the great waters; there was no knowledge of your footsteps.
You were guiding your people like a flock, by the hand of Moses and Aaron.Maschil. Of Asaph.
Give ear, O my people, to my law; let your ears be bent down to the words of my mouth.
Opening my mouth I will give out a story, even the dark sayings of old times;
Which have come to our hearing and our knowledge, as they were given to us by our fathers.
We will not keep them secret from our children; we will make clear to the coming generation the praises of the Lord and his strength, and the great works of wonder which he has done.
He put up a witness in Jacob, and made a law in Israel; which he gave to our fathers so that they might give knowledge of them to their children;
So that the generation to come might have knowledge of them, even the children of the future, who would give word of them to their children;
So that they might put their hope in God, and not let God's works go out of their minds, but keep his laws;
And not be like their fathers, a stiff-necked and uncontrolled generation; a generation whose heart was hard, whose spirit was not true to God.
The children of Ephraim, armed with bows, were turned back on the day of the fight.
They were not ruled by God's word, and they would not go in the way of his law;
They let his works go out of their memory, and the wonders which he had made them see.
He did great works before the eyes of their fathers, in the land of Egypt, in the fields of Zoan.
The sea was cut in two so that they might go through; the waters were massed together on this side and on that.
In the daytime he was guiding them in the cloud, and all through the night with a light of fire.
The rocks of the waste land were broken by his power, and he gave them drink as out of the deep waters.
He made streams come out of the rock; and waters came flowing down like rivers.
And they went on sinning against him even more, turning away from the Most High in the waste land;
Testing God in their hearts, requesting meat for their desire.
They said bitter words against God, saying, Is God able to make ready a table in the waste land?
See, the rock was cut open by his power, so that the water came rushing out, and overflowing streams; is he able to give us bread? is he able to get meat for his people?
So these things came to the Lord's ears, and he was angry; and a fire was lighted against Jacob, and wrath came up against Israel;
Because they had no faith in God, and no hope in his salvation.
And he gave orders to the clouds on high, and the doors of heaven were open;
And he sent down manna like rain for their food, and gave them the grain of heaven.
Man took part in the food of strong ones; he sent them meat in full measure.
He sent an east wind from heaven, driving on the south wind by his power.
He sent down meat on them like dust, and feathered birds like the sand of the sea,
And he let it come down into their resting-place, round about their tents.
So they had food and were full; for he gave them their desire;
But they were not turned from their desires; and while the food was still in their mouths,
The wrath of God came on them, and put to death the fattest of them, and put an end to the young men of Israel.
For all this they went on sinning even more, and had no faith in his great wonders.
So their days were wasted like a breath, and their years in trouble.
When he sent death on them, then they made search for him; turning to him and looking for him with care;
In the memory that God was their Rock, and the Most High God their saviour.
But their lips were false to him, and their tongues were untrue to him;
And their hearts were not right with him, and they did not keep their agreement with him.
But he, being full of pity, has forgiveness for sin, and does not put an end to man: frequently turning back his wrath, and not being violently angry.
So he kept in mind that they were only flesh; a breath which is quickly gone, and will not come again.
How frequently did they go against him in the waste land, and give him cause for grief in the dry places!
Again they put God to the test, and gave pain to the Holy One of Israel.
They did not keep in mind the work of his hand, or the day when he took them from the power of their haters;
How he had done his signs in Egypt, and his wonders in the field of Zoan;
So that their rivers were turned to blood, and they were not able to get drink from their streams.
He sent different sorts of flies among them, poisoning their flesh; and frogs for their destruction.
He gave the increase of their fields to worms, the fruits of their industry to the locusts.
He sent ice for the destruction of their vines; their trees were damaged by the bitter cold.
Ice was rained down on their cattle; thunderstorms sent destruction among the flocks.
He sent on them the heat of his wrath, his bitter disgust, letting loose evil angels among them.
He let his wrath have its way; he did not keep back their soul from death, but gave their life to disease.
He gave to destruction all the first sons of Egypt; the first-fruits of their strength in the tents of Ham;
But he took his people out like sheep, guiding them in the waste land like a flock.
He took them on safely so that they had no fear; but their haters were covered by the sea.
And he was their guide to his holy land, even to the mountain, which his right hand had made his;
Driving out nations before them, marking out the line of their heritage, and giving the people of Israel their tents for a resting-place.
But they were bitter against the Most High God, testing him, and not keeping his laws;
Their hearts were turned back and untrue like their fathers; they were turned to one side like a twisted bow.
They made him angry with their high places; moving him to wrath with their images.
When this came to God's ears he was very angry, and gave up Israel completely;
So that he went away from the holy place in Shiloh, the tent which he had put among men;
And he let his strength be taken prisoner, and gave his glory into the hands of his hater.
He gave his people up to the sword, and was angry with his heritage.
Their young men were burned in the fire; and their virgins were not praised in the bride-song.
Their priests were put to death by the sword, and their widows made no weeping for them.
Then was the Lord like one awaking from sleep, and like a strong man crying out because of wine.
His haters were turned back by his blows and shamed for ever.
And he put the tent of Joseph on one side, and took not the tribe of Ephraim;
But he took the tribe of Judah for himself, and the mountain of Zion, in which he had pleasure.
And he made his holy place like the high heaven, like the earth which is fixed by him for ever.
He took David to be his servant, taking him from the place of the flocks;
From looking after the sheep which were giving milk, he took him to give food to Jacob his people, and to Israel his heritage.
So he gave them food with an upright heart, guiding them by the wisdom of his hands.A Psalm. Of Asaph.
O God, the nations have come into your heritage; they have made your holy Temple unclean; they have made Jerusalem a mass of broken walls.
They have given the bodies of your servants as food to the birds of the air, and the flesh of your saints to the beasts of the earth.
Their blood has been flowing like water round about Jerusalem; there was no one to put them in their last resting-place.
We are looked down on by our neighbours, we are laughed at and made sport of by those who are round us.
How long, O Lord? will you be angry for ever? will your wrath go on burning like fire?
Let your wrath be on the nations who have no knowledge of you, and on the kingdoms who have not made prayer to your name.
For they have taken Jacob for their meat, and made waste his house.
Do not keep in mind against us the sins of our fathers; let your mercy come to us quickly, for we have been made very low.
Give us help, O God of our salvation, for the glory of your name; take us out of danger and give us forgiveness for our sins, because of your name.
Why may the nations say, Where is their God? Let payment for the blood of your servants be made openly among the nations before our eyes.
Let the cry of the prisoner come before you; with your strong arm make free the children of death;
And give punishment seven times over into the breast of our neighbours for the bitter words which they have said against you, O Lord.
So we your people, and the sheep of your flock, will give you glory for ever: we will go on praising you through all generations.To the chief music-maker; put to Shoshannim-eduth. Of Asaph. A Psalm.
Give ear, O Keeper of Israel, guiding Joseph like a flock; you who have your seat on the winged ones, let your glory be seen.
Before Ephraim and Benjamin and Manasseh, let your strength be awake from sleep, and come as our salvation.
Take us back again, O God; let us see the shining of your face, and let us be safe.
O Lord God of armies, how long will your wrath be burning against the rest of your people?
You have given them the bread of weeping for food; for their drink you have given them sorrow in great measure.
You make us a cause of war among our neighbours; our haters are laughing at us among themselves.
Take us back again, O God of armies; let us see the shining of your face, and let us be safe.
You took a vine out of Egypt: driving out the nations, and planting it in their land.
You made ready a place for it, so that it might take deep root, and it sent out its branches over all the land.
The mountains were covered with its shade, and the great trees with its branches.
It sent out its arms to the Sea, and its branches to the River.
Why are its walls broken down by your hands, so that all who go by may take its fruit?
It is uprooted by the pigs from the woods, the beasts of the field get their food from it.
Come back, O God of armies: from heaven let your eyes be turned to this vine, and give your mind to it,
Even to the tree which was planted by your right hand, and to the branch which you made strong for yourself.
It is burned with fire; it is cut down: they are made waste by the wrath of your face.
Let your hand be on the man of your right hand, on the son of man whom you made strong for yourself.
So will we not be turned back from you; keep us in life, and we will give praise to your name.
Take us back, O Lord God of armies; let us see the shining of your face, and let us be safe.To the chief music-maker; put to the Gittith. Of Asaph.
Make a song to God our strength: make a glad cry to the God of Jacob.
Take up the melody, playing on an instrument of music, even on corded instruments.
Let the horn be sounded in the time of the new moon, at the full moon, on our holy feast-day:
For this is a rule for Israel, and a law of the God of Jacob.
He gave it to Joseph as a witness, when he went out over the land of Egypt; then the words of a strange tongue were sounding in my ears.
I took the weight from his back; his hands were made free from the baskets.
You gave a cry in your trouble, and I made you free; I gave you an answer in the secret place of the thunder; I put you to the test at the waters of Meribah. (Selah.)
Give ear, O my people, and I will give you my word, O Israel, if you will only do as I say!
There is to be no strange god among you; you are not to give worship to any other god.
I am the Lord your God, who took you up from the land of Egypt: let your mouth be open wide, so that I may give you food.
But my people did not give ear to my voice; Israel would have nothing to do with me.
So I gave them up to the desires of their hearts; that they might go after their evil purposes.
If only my people would give ear to me, walking in my ways!
I would quickly overcome their haters: my hand would be turned against those who make war on them.
The haters of the Lord would be broken, and their destruction would be eternal.
I would give them the best grain for food; you would be full of honey from the rock.A Psalm. Of Asaph.
God is in the meeting-place of God; he is judging among the gods.
How long will you go on judging falsely, having respect for the persons of evil-doers? (Selah.)
Give ear to the cause of the poor and the children without fathers; let those who are troubled and in need have their rights.
Be the saviour of the poor and those who have nothing: take them out of the hand of the evil-doers.
They have no knowledge or sense; they go about in the dark: all the bases of the earth are moved.
I said, You are gods; all of you are the sons of the Most High:
But you will come to death like men, falling like one of the rulers of the earth.
Up! O God, come as judge of the earth; for all the nations are your heritage.A Song. A Psalm. Of Asaph.
O God, do not keep quiet: let your lips be open and take no rest, O God.
For see! those who make war on you are out of control; your haters are lifting up their heads.
They have made wise designs against your people, talking together against those whom you keep in a secret place.
They have said, Come, let us put an end to them as a nation; so that the name of Israel may go out of man's memory.
For they have all come to an agreement; they are all joined together against you:
The tents of Edom and the Ishmaelites; Moab and the Hagarites;
Gebal and Ammon and Amalek; the Philistines and the people of Tyre;
Assur is joined with them; they have become the support of the children of Lot. (Selah.)
Do to them what you did to the Midianites; what you did to Sisera and Jabin, at the stream of Kishon:
Who came to destruction at En-dor; their bodies became dust and waste.
Make their chiefs like Oreb and Zeeb; and all their rulers like Zebah and Zalmunna:
Who have said, Let us take for our heritage the resting-place of God.
O my God, make them like the rolling dust; like dry stems before the wind.
As fire burning a wood, and as a flame causing fire on the mountains,
So go after them with your strong wind, and let them be full of fear because of your storm.
Let their faces be full of shame; so that they may give honour to your name, O Lord.
Let them be overcome and troubled for ever; let them be put to shame and come to destruction;
So that men may see that you only, whose name is Yahweh, are Most High over all the earth.To the chief music-maker; put to the Gittith A Psalm. Of the sons of Korah.
How dear are your tents, O Lord of armies!
The passion of my soul's desire is for the house of the Lord; my heart and my flesh are crying out for the living God.
The little birds have places for themselves, where they may put their young, even your altars, O Lord of armies, my King and my God.
Happy are they whose resting-place is in your house: they will still be praising you. (Selah.)
Happy is the man whose strength is in you; in whose heart are the highways to Zion.
Going through the valley of balsam-trees, they make it a place of springs; it is clothed with blessings by the early rain.
They go from strength to strength; every one of them comes before God in Zion.
O Lord God of armies, let my prayer come to you: give ear, O God of Jacob. (Selah.)
O God, let your eyes be on him who is our safe cover, and let your heart be turned to your king.
For a day in your house is better than a thousand. It is better to be a door-keeper in the house of my God, than to be living in the tents of sin.
The Lord God is our sun and our strength: the Lord will give grace and glory: he will not keep back any good thing from those whose ways are upright.
O Lord of armies, happy is the man whose hope is in you.To the chief music-maker. A Psalm. Of the sons of Korah.
Lord, you were good to your land: changing the fate of Jacob.
The wrongdoing of your people had forgiveness; all their sin had been covered. (Selah.)
You were no longer angry: you were turned from the heat of your wrath.
Come back to us, O God of our salvation, and be angry with us no longer.
Will you go on being angry with us for ever? will you keep your wrath against us through all the long generations?
Will you not give us life again, so that your people may be glad in you?
Let us see your mercy, O Lord, and give us your salvation.
I will give ear to the voice of the Lord; for he will say words of peace to his people and to his saints; but let them not go back to their foolish ways.
Truly, his salvation is near to his worshippers; so that glory may be in our land.
Mercy and faith have come together; righteousness and peace have given one another a kiss.
Faith comes up from the earth like a plant; righteousness is looking down from heaven.
The Lord will give what is good; and our land will give its increase.
Righteousness will go before him, making a way for his footsteps.A Prayer. Of David.
Let your ears be open to my voice, O Lord, and give me an answer; for I am poor and in need.
Keep my soul, for I am true to you; O my God, give salvation to your servant, whose hope is in you.
Have mercy on me, O Lord; for my cry goes up to you all the day.
Make glad the soul of your servant; for it is lifted up to you, O Lord.
You are good, O Lord, and full of forgiveness; your mercy is great to all who make their cry to you.
O Lord, give ear to my prayer; and take note of the sound of my requests.
In the day of my trouble I send up my cry to you; for you will give me an answer.
There is no god like you, O Lord; there are no works like your works.
Let all the nations whom you have made come and give worship to you, O Lord, giving glory to your name.
For you are great, and do great works of wonder; you only are God.
Make your way clear to me, O Lord; I will go on my way in your faith: let my heart be glad in the fear of your name.
I will give you praise, O Lord my God, with all my heart; I will give glory to your name for ever.
For your mercy to me is great; you have taken my soul up from the deep places of the underworld.
O God, men of pride have come up against me, and the army of violent men would take my life; they have not put you before them.
But you, O Lord, are a God full of pity and forgiveness, slow to get angry, great in mercy and wisdom.
O be turned to me and have mercy on me: give your strength to your servant, and your salvation to the son of her who is your servant.
Give me a sign for good; so that my haters may see it and be shamed; because you, Lord, have been my help and comfort.Of the sons of Korah. A Psalm. A Song.
This house is resting on the holy mountain.
The Lord has more love for the doors of Zion than for all the tents of Jacob.
Noble things are said of you, O town of God. (Selah.)
Rahab and Babylon will be named among those who have knowledge of me; see, Philistia and Tyre, with Ethiopia; this man had his birth there.
And of Zion it will be said, This or that man had his birth there; and the Most High will make her strong.
The Lord will keep in mind, when he is writing the records of the people, that this man had his birth there. (Selah.)
The players on instruments will be there, and the dancers will say, All my springs are in you.A Song. A Psalm. Of the sons of Korah. To the chief music-maker; put to Mahalath Leannoth. Maschil. Of Heman the Ezrahite.
O Lord, God of my salvation, I have been crying to you for help by day and by night:
Let my prayer come before you; give ear to my cry:
For my soul is full of evils, and my life has come near to the underworld.
I am numbered among those who go down into the earth; I have become like a man for whom there is no help:
My soul is among the dead, like those in the underworld, to whom you give no more thought; for they are cut off from your care.
You have put me in the lowest deep, even in dark places.
The weight of your wrath is crushing me, all your waves have overcome me. (Selah.)
You have sent my friends far away from me; you have made me a disgusting thing in their eyes: I am shut up, and not able to come out.
My eyes are wasting away because of my trouble: Lord, my cry has gone up to you every day, my hands are stretched out to you.
Will you do works of wonder for the dead? will the shades come back to give you praise? (Selah.)
Will the story of your mercy be given in the house of the dead? will news of your faith come to the place of destruction?
May there be knowledge of your wonders in the dark? or of your righteousness where memory is dead?
But to you did I send up my cry, O Lord; in the morning my prayer came before you.
Lord, why have you sent away my soul? why is your face covered from me?
I have been troubled and in fear of death from the time when I was young; your wrath is hard on me, and I have no strength.
The heat of your wrath has gone over me; I am broken by your cruel punishments.
They are round me all the day like water; they have made a circle about me.
You have sent my friends and lovers far from me; I am gone from the memory of those who are dear to me.Maschil. Of Ethan the Ezrahite.
My song will be of the mercies of the Lord for ever: with my mouth will I make his faith clear to all generations.
For you have said, Mercy will be made strong for ever; my faith will be unchanging in the heavens.
I have made an agreement with the man of my selection, I have made an oath to David my servant;
I will make your seed go on for ever, your kingdom will be strong through all generations. (Selah.)
In heaven let them give praise for your wonders, O Lord; and your unchanging faith among the saints.
For who is there in the heavens in comparison with the Lord? who is like the Lord among the sons of the gods?
God is greatly to be feared among the saints, and to be honoured over all those who are about him.
O Lord God of armies, who is strong like you, O Jah? and your unchanging faith is round about you.
You have rule over the sea in storm; when its waves are troubled, you make them calm.
Rahab was crushed by you like one wounded to death; with your strong arm you put to flight all your haters.
Yours are the heavens, and the earth is yours; you have made the world, and everything which is in it.
You have made the north and the south; Tabor and Hermon are sounding with joy at your name.
Yours is an arm of power; strong is your hand and high your right hand.
The seat of your kingdom is resting on righteousness and right judging: mercy and good faith come before your face.
Happy are the people who have knowledge of the holy cry: the light of your face, O Lord, will be shining on their way.
In your name will they have joy all the day: in your righteousness will they be lifted up.
For you are the glory of their strength; in your pleasure will our horn be lifted up.
For our breastplate is the Lord; and our king is the Holy One of Israel's.
Then your voice came to your holy one in a vision, saying, I have put the crown on a strong one, lifting up one taken from among the people.
I have made discovery of David my servant; I have put my holy oil on his head.
My hand will be his support; my arm will give him strength.
The deceit of those who are against him will not overcome him; he will not be troubled by the sons of evil.
I will have those who are against him broken before his face, and his haters will be crushed under my blows.
But my faith and my mercy will be with him; and in my name will his horn be lifted up.
I will put his hand in the sea, and his right hand in the rivers.
He will say to me, You are my father, my God, and the Rock of my salvation.
And I will make him the first of my sons, most high over the kings of the earth.
I will keep my mercy for him for ever; my agreement with him will not be changed.
His seed will keep their place for ever; his kingdom will be eternal, like the heavens.
If his children give up my law, and are not ruled by my decisions;
If my rules are broken, and my orders are not kept;
Then I will send punishment on them for their sin; my rod will be the reward of their evil-doing.
But I will not take away my mercy from him, and will not be false to my faith.
I will be true to my agreement; the things which have gone out of my lips will not be changed.
I have made an oath once by my holy name, that I will not be false to David.
His seed will not come to an end for ever; the seat of his kingdom will be like the sun before me.
It will be fixed for ever like the moon; and the witness in heaven is true. (Selah.)
But you have put him away in disgust; you have been angry with the king of your selection.
You have made your agreement with your servant of no effect: you have had no respect for his crown, it has come down even to the earth.
All his walls are broken down; you have given his strong towers to destruction.
All those who come by take away his goods; he is laughed at by his neighbours.
You have given power to the right hand of his haters; you have made glad all those who are against him.
His sword is turned back; you have not been his support in the fight.
You have put an end to his glory: the seat of his kingdom has been levelled to the earth.
You have made him old before his time; he is covered with shame. (Selah.)
How long, O Lord, will you Keep yourself for ever from our eyes? how long will your wrath be burning like fire?
See how short my time is; why have you made all men for no purpose?
What man now living will not see death? will he be able to keep back his soul from the underworld? (Selah.)
Lord, where are your earlier mercies? where is the oath which you made to David in unchanging faith?
Keep in mind, O Lord, the shame of your servants, and how the bitter words of all the people have come into my heart;
The bitter words of your haters, O Lord, shaming the footsteps of your king.
Let the Lord be praised for ever. So be it, So be it.A Prayer of Moses, the man of God.
Lord, you have been our resting-place in all generations.
Before the mountains were made, before you had given birth to the earth and the world, before time was, and for ever, you are God.
You send man back to his dust; and say, Go back, you children of men.
For to you a thousand years are no more than yesterday when it is past, and like a watch in the night.
...
In the morning it is green; in the evening it is cut down, and becomes dry.
We are burned up by the heat of your passion, and troubled by your wrath.
You have put our evil doings before you, our secret sins in the light of your face.
For all our days have gone by in your wrath; our years come to an end like a breath.
The measure of our life is seventy years; and if through strength it may be eighty years, its pride is only trouble and sorrow, for it comes to an end and we are quickly gone.
Who has knowledge of the power of your wrath, or who takes note of the weight of your passion?
So give us knowledge of the number of our days, that we may get a heart of wisdom.
Come back, O Lord; how long? let your purpose for your servants be changed.
In the morning give us your mercy in full measure; so that we may have joy and delight all our days.
Make us glad in reward for the days of our sorrow, and for the years in which we have seen evil.
Make your work clear to your servants, and your glory to their children.
Let the pleasure of the Lord our God be on us: O Lord, give strength to the work of our hands.Happy is he whose resting-place is in the secret of the Lord, and under the shade of the wings of the Most High;
Who says of the Lord, He is my safe place and my tower of strength: he is my God, in whom is my hope.
He will take you out of the bird-net, and keep you safe from wasting disease.
You will be covered by his feathers; under his wings you will be safe: his good faith will be your salvation.
You will have no fear of the evil things of the night, or of the arrow in flight by day,
Or of the disease which takes men in the dark, or of the destruction which makes waste when the sun is high.
You will see a thousand falling by your side, and ten thousand at your right hand; but it will not come near you.
Only with your eyes will you see the reward of the evil-doers.
Because you have said, I am in the hands of the Lord, the Most High is my safe resting- place;
No evil will come on you, and no disease will come near your tent.
For he will give you into the care of his angels to keep you wherever you go.
In their hands they will keep you up, so that your foot may not be crushed against a stone.
You will put your foot on the lion and the snake; the young lion and the great snake will be crushed under your feet.
Because he has given me his love, I will take him out of danger: I will put him in a place of honour, because he has kept my name in his heart.
When his cry comes up to me, I will give him an answer: I will be with him in trouble; I will make him free from danger and give him honour.
With long life will he be rewarded; and I will let him see my salvation.A Psalm. A Song for the Sabbath.
It is a good thing to give praise to the Lord, and to make melody to your name, O Most High;
To make clear your mercy in the morning, and your unchanging faith every night;
On a ten-corded instrument, and on an instrument of music with a quiet sound.
For you, O Lord, have made me glad through your work; I will have joy in the works of your hands.
O Lord, how great are your works! and your thoughts are very deep.
A man without sense has no knowledge of this; and a foolish man may not take it in.
When the sinners come up like the grass, and all the workers of evil do well for themselves, it is so that their end may be eternal destruction.
But you, O Lord, are on high for ever.
For see! your haters, O Lord, will be put to death; all the workers of evil will be put to flight;
But my horn is lifted up like the horn of the ox: the best oil is flowing on my head.
My eyes have seen trouble come on my haters; my ears have news of the fate of the evil-doers who have come up against me.
The good man will be like a tall tree in his strength; his growth will be as the wide- stretching trees of Lebanon.
Those who are planted in the house of the Lord will come up tall and strong in his gardens.
They will give fruit even when they are old; they will be fertile and full of growth;
For a sign that the Lord is upright; he is my Rock, there is no deceit in him.The Lord is King; he is clothed with glory; the Lord is clothed with strength; power is the cord of his robe; the world is fixed, so that it may not be moved.
The seat of your power has been from the past; you are eternal.
The rivers send up, O Lord, the rivers send up their voices; they send them up with a loud cry.
The Lord in heaven is stronger than the noise of great waters, yes, he is stronger than the great waves of the sea.
Your witness is most certain; it is right for your house to be holy, O Lord, for ever.O God, in whose hands is punishment, O God of punishment, let your shining face be seen.
Be lifted up, O judge of the earth; let their reward come to the men of pride.
How long will sinners, O Lord, how long will sinners have joy over us?
Words of pride come from their lips; all the workers of evil say great things of themselves.
Your people are crushed by them, O Lord, your heritage is troubled,
They put to death the widow and the guest, they take the lives of children who have no father;
And they say, Jah will not see it, the God of Jacob will not give thought to it.
Give your mind to my words, you who are without wisdom among the people; you foolish men, when will you be wise?
Has he by whom your ears were planted no hearing? or is he blind by whom your eyes were formed?
He who is the judge of the nations, will he not give men the reward of their acts, even he who gives knowledge to man?
The Lord has knowledge of the thoughts of man, for they are only a breath.
Happy is the man who is guided by you, O Jah, and to whom you give teaching out of your law;
So that you may give him rest from the days of evil, till a hole is made ready for the destruction of the sinners.
The Lord will not give up his people, or take away his support from his heritage;
But decisions will again be made in righteousness; and they will be kept by all whose hearts are true.
Who will give me help against the sinners? and who will be my support against the workers of evil?
If the Lord had not been my helper, my soul would quickly have gone down into death.
If I say, My foot is slipping; your mercy, O Lord, is my support.
Among all my troubled thoughts, your comforts are the delight of my soul.
What part with you has the seat of sin, which makes evil into a law?
They are banded together against the soul of the upright, to give decisions against those who have done no wrong.
But the Lord is my safe resting-place; my God is the Rock where I am safe.
And he has made their evil designs come back on themselves, cutting them off in their sin; the Lord our God will put an end to them.O come, let us make songs to the Lord; sending up glad voices to the Rock of our salvation.
Let us come before his face with praises; and make melody with holy songs.
For the Lord is a great God, and a great King over all gods.
The deep places of the earth are in his hand; and the tops of the mountains are his.
The sea is his, and he made it; and the dry land was formed by his hands.
O come, let us give worship, falling down on our knees before the Lord our Maker.
For he is our God; and we are the people to whom he gives food, and the sheep of his flock. Today, if you would only give ear to his voice!
Let not your hearts be hard, as at Meribah, as in the day of Massah in the waste land;
When your fathers put me to the test and saw my power and my work.
For forty years I was angry with this generation, and said, They are a people whose hearts are turned away from me, for they have no knowledge of my ways;
And I made an oath in my wrath, that they might not come into my place of rest.O make a new song to the Lord; let all the earth make melody to the Lord.
Make songs to the Lord, blessing his name; give the good news of his salvation day by day.
Make clear his glory to the nations, and his wonders to all the peoples.
For the Lord is great, and greatly to be praised; he is more to be feared than all other gods.
For all the gods of the nations are false gods; but the Lord made the heavens.
Honour and glory are before him: strong and fair is his holy place.
Give to the Lord, O you families of the peoples, give to the Lord glory and strength.
Give to the Lord the glory of his name; take with you an offering and come into his house.
O give worship to the Lord in holy robes; be in fear before him, all the earth.
Say among the nations, The Lord is King; yes, the world is ordered so that it may not be moved; he will be an upright judge of the peoples.
Let the heavens have joy and the earth be glad; let the sea be thundering with all its waters;
Let the field be glad, and everything which is in it; yes, let all the trees of the wood be sounding with joy,
Before the Lord, for he is come; he is come to be the judge of the earth; the earth will be judged in righteousness, and the peoples with unchanging faith.The Lord is King, let the earth have joy; let all the sea-lands be glad.
Dark clouds are round him; his kingdom is based on righteousness and right judging.
Fire goes before him, burning up all those who are against him round about.
His bright flames give light to the world; the earth saw it with fear.
The mountains became like wax at the coming of the Lord, at the coming of the Lord of all the earth.
The heavens gave out the news of his righteousness, and all the people saw his glory.
Shamed be all those who give worship to images, and take pride in false gods; give him worship, all you gods.
Zion gave ear and was glad; and the daughters of Judah were full of joy, because of your decisions, O Lord.
For you, Lord, are most high over the earth; you are lifted up over all other gods.
You who are lovers of the Lord, be haters of evil; he keeps the souls of his saints; he takes them out of the hand of sinners.
Light is shining on the lovers of righteousness, and for the upright in heart there is joy.
Be glad in the Lord, you upright men; praising the memory of his holy name.The Lord is King; let the peoples be in fear: his seat is on the winged ones; let the earth be moved.
The Lord is great in Zion; he is high over all the nations.
Let them give praise to your name, for it is great and to be feared; holy is he.
The king's power is used for righteousness; you give true decisions, judging rightly in the land of Jacob.
Give high honour to the Lord our God, worshipping at his feet; holy is he.
Moses and Aaron among his priests, and Samuel among those who gave honour to his name; they made prayers to the Lord, and he gave answers to them.
His voice came to them from the pillar of cloud; they kept his witness, and the law which he gave them.
You gave them an answer, O Lord our God; you took away their sin, though you gave them punishment for their wrongdoing.
Give high honour to the Lord our God, worshipping with your faces turned to his holy hill; for the Lord our God is holy.A Psalm. Of David.
I will make a song of mercy and righteousness; to you, O Lord, will I make melody.
I will do wisely in the way of righteousness: O when will you come to me? I will be walking in my house with a true heart.
I will not put any evil thing before my eyes; I am against all turning to one side; I will not have it near me.
The false heart I will send away from me: I will not have an evil-doer for a friend.
I will put to death anyone who says evil of his neighbour secretly; the man with a high look and a heart of pride is disgusting to me.
My eyes will be on those of good faith in the land, so that they may be living in my house; he who is walking in the right way will be my servant.
The worker of deceit will not come into my house; the false man will have no place before my eyes.
Morning by morning will I put to death all the sinners in the land, so that all evil-doers may be cut off from Jerusalem.Of David.
Give praise to the Lord, O my soul; let everything in me give praise to his holy name.
Give praise to the Lord, O my soul; let not all his blessings go from your memory.
He has forgiveness for all your sins; he takes away all your diseases;
He keeps back your life from destruction, crowning you with mercy and grace.
He makes your mouth full of good things, so that your strength is made new again like the eagle's.
The Lord gives decisions in righteousness for all who are in trouble.
He gave knowledge of his way to Moses, and made his acts clear to the children of Israel.
The Lord is kind and full of pity, not quickly made angry, but ever ready to have mercy.
His feeling will no longer be bitter; he will not keep his wrath for ever.
He has not given us the punishment for our sins, or the reward of our wrongdoing.
For as the heaven is high over the earth, so great is his mercy to his worshippers.
As far as the east is from the west, so far has he put our sins from us.
As a father has pity on his children, so the Lord has pity on his worshippers.
For he has knowledge of our feeble frame; he sees that we are only dust.
As for man, his days are as grass: his beautiful growth is like the flower of the field.
The wind goes over it and it is gone; and its place sees it no longer.
But the mercy of the Lord is eternal for his worshippers, and their children's children will see his righteousness;
If they keep his agreement, and have his laws in mind to do them.
The Lord has made ready his high seat in the heavens; his kingdom is ruling over all.
Give praise to the Lord, you his angels, who are great in strength, doing his orders, and waiting for his voice.
Give praise to the Lord, all you his armies; and you his servants who do his pleasure.
Give praise to the Lord, all his works, in all places under his rule: give praise to the Lord, O my soul.Give praise to the Lord, O my soul. O Lord my God, you are very great; you are robed with honour and power.
You are clothed with light as with a robe; stretching out the heavens like a curtain:
The arch of your house is based on the waters; you make the clouds your carriage; you go on the wings of the wind:
He makes winds his angels, and flames of fire his servants.
He has made the earth strong on its bases, so that it may not be moved for ever and ever;
Covering it with the sea as with a robe: the waters were high over the mountains;
At the voice of your word they went in flight; at the sound of your thunder they went away in fear;
The mountains came up and the valleys went down into the place which you had made ready for them.
You made a limit over which they might not go, so that the earth would never again be covered by them.
You sent the springs into the valleys; they are flowing between the hills.
They give drink to every beast of the field; the mountain asses come to them for water.
The birds of the air have their resting-places by them, and make their song among the branches.
He sends down rain from his store-houses on the hills: the earth is full of the fruit of his works.
He makes the grass come up for the cattle, and plants for the use of man; so that bread may come out of the earth;
And wine to make glad the heart of man, and oil to make his face shining, and bread giving strength to his heart.
The trees of the Lord are full of growth, the cedars of Lebanon of his planting;
Where the birds have their resting-places; as for the stork, the tall trees are her house.
The high hills are a safe place for the mountain goats, and the rocks for the small beasts.
He made the moon for a sign of the divisions of the year; teaching the sun the time of its going down.
When you make it dark, it is night, when all the beasts of the woods come quietly out of their secret places.
The young lions go thundering after their food; searching for their meat from God.
The sun comes up, and they come together, and go back to their secret places to take their rest.
Man goes out to his work, and to his business, till the evening.
O Lord, how great is the number of your works! in wisdom you have made them all; the earth is full of the things you have made.
There is the great, wide sea, where there are living things, great and small, more than may be numbered.
There go the ships; there is that great beast, which you have made as a plaything.
All of them are waiting for you, to give them their food in its time.
They take what you give them; they are full of the good things which come from your open hand.
If your face is veiled, they are troubled; when you take away their breath, they come to an end, and go back to the dust.
If you send out your spirit, they are given life; you make new the face of the earth.
Let the glory of the Lord be for ever; let the Lord have joy in his works:
At whose look the earth is shaking; at whose touch the mountains send out smoke.
I will make songs to the Lord all my life; I will make melody to my God while I have my being.
Let my thoughts be sweet to him: I will be glad in the Lord.
Let sinners be cut off from the earth, and let all evil-doers come to an end. Give praise to the Lord, O my soul. Give praise to the Lord.O give praise to the Lord; give honour to his name, talking of his doings among the peoples.
Let your voice be sounding in songs and melody; let all your thoughts be of the wonder of his works.
Have glory in his holy name; let the hearts of those who are searching after the Lord be glad.
Let your search be for the Lord and for his strength; let your hearts ever be turned to him.
Keep in mind the great works which he has done; his wonders, and the decisions of his mouth;
O you seed of Abraham, his servant, you children of Jacob, his loved ones.
He is the Lord our God: he is judge of all the earth.
He has kept his agreement in mind for ever, the word which he gave for a thousand generations;
The agreement which he made with Abraham, and his oath to Isaac;
And he gave it to Jacob for a law, and to Israel for an eternal agreement;
Saying, To you will I give the land of Canaan, the measured line of your heritage:
When they were still small in number, and strange in the land;
When they went about from one nation to another, and from one kingdom to another people.
He would not let anyone do them wrong; he even kept back kings because of them,
Saying, Put not your hand on those who have been marked with my holy oil, and do my prophets no wrong.
And he took away all food from the land, so that the people were without bread.
He sent a man before them, even Joseph, who was given as a servant for a price:
His feet were fixed in chains; his neck was put in iron bands;
Till the time when his word came true; he was tested by the word of the Lord.
The king sent men to take off his chains; even the ruler of the people, who let him go free.
He made him lord of his house, and ruler over everything he had;
To give his chiefs teaching at his pleasure, and so that his law-givers might get wisdom from him.
Then Israel came into Egypt, and Jacob was living in the land of Ham.
And his people were greatly increased, and became stronger than those who were against them.
Their hearts were turned to hate against his people, so that they made secret designs against them.
He sent Moses, his servant, and Aaron, the man of his selection.
He let his signs be seen among the people, and his wonders in the land of Ham.
He sent black night and made it dark; and they did not go against his word.
At his word their waters were turned to blood, and he sent death on all their fish.
Their land was full of frogs, even in the rooms of the king.
He gave the word, and there came the dog-fly, and insects over all the land.
He gave them ice for rain, and flaming fire in their land.
He gave their vines and their fig-trees to destruction, and the trees of their land were broken down.
At his word the locusts came, and young locusts more than might be numbered,
And put an end to all the plants of their land, taking all the fruit of the earth for food.
He put to death the first child of every family in the land, the first-fruits of their strength.
He took his people out with silver and gold: there was not one feeble person among them.
Egypt was glad when they went; for the fear of them had come down on them.
A cloud was stretched over them for a cover; and he sent fire to give light in the night.
At the people's request he sent birds, and gave them the bread of heaven for food.
His hand made the rock open, and the waters came streaming out; they went down through the dry places like a river.
For he kept in mind his holy word, and Abraham, his servant.
And he took his people out with joy, the men of his selection with glad cries:
And gave them the lands of the nations; and they took the work of the peoples for a heritage;
So that they might keep his orders, and be true to his laws. Give praise to the Lord.Let the Lord be praised. O give praise to the Lord, for he is good: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
Who is able to give an account of the great acts of the Lord, or to make clear all his praise?
Happy are they whose decisions are upright, and he who does righteousness at all times.
Keep me in mind, O Lord, when you are good to your people; O let your salvation come to me;
So that I may see the well-being of the people of your selection, and have a part in the joy of your nation, and take pride in your heritage.
We are sinners like our fathers, we have done wrong, our acts are evil.
Our fathers did not give thought to your wonders in Egypt; they did not keep in memory the great number of your mercies, but gave you cause for wrath at the sea, even at the Red Sea.
But he was their saviour because of his name, so that men might see his great power.
By his word the Red Sea was made dry: and he took them through the deep waters as through the waste land.
And he took them safely out of the hands of their haters, and kept them from the attacks of those who were against them.
And the waters went over their haters; all of them came to an end.
Then they had faith in his words; they gave him songs of praise.
But their memory of his works was short; not waiting to be guided by him,
They gave way to their evil desires in the waste land, and put God to the test in the dry places.
And he gave them their request, but sent a wasting disease into their souls.
They were full of envy against Moses among the tents, and against Aaron, the holy one of the Lord.
The earth opening put an end to Dathan, covering up Abiram and his band.
And a fire was lighted among their tents; the sinners were burned up by the flames.
They made a young ox in Horeb, and gave worship to an image of gold.
And their glory was changed into the image of an ox, whose food is grass.
They had no memory of God their saviour, who had done great things in Egypt;
Works of wonder in the land of Ham, and things of fear by the Red Sea.
And he was purposing to put an end to them if Moses, his special servant, had not gone up before him, between him and his people, turning back his wrath, to keep them from destruction.
They were disgusted with the good land; they had no belief in his word;
Talking against him secretly in their tents, they did not give ear to the voice of the Lord.
So he made an oath against them, to put an end to them in the waste land:
That their children might be mixed among the nations, and sent away into other lands.
And they were joined to Baal-peor, and took part in the offerings to the dead.
So they made him angry by their behaviour; and he sent disease on them.
Then Phinehas got up, and made prayer for them; and the disease went no farther.
And all the generations coming after him kept the memory of his righteousness for ever.
They made God angry again at the waters of Meribah, so that Moses was troubled because of them;
For they made his spirit bitter, and he said unwise things.
They did not put an end to the peoples, as the Lord had said;
But they were joined to the nations, learning their works.
And they gave worship to images; which were a danger to them:
They even made offerings of their sons and their daughters to evil spirits,
And gave the blood of their sons and their daughters who had done no wrong, offering them to the images of Canaan; and the land was made unclean with blood.
So they became unclean through their works, going after their evil desires.
Then the wrath of the Lord was burning against his people, and he was angry with his heritage.
And he gave them into the hands of the nations; and they were ruled by their haters.
By them they were crushed, and made low under their hands.
Again and again he made them free; but their hearts were turned against his purpose, and they were overcome by their sins.
But when their cry came to his ears, he had pity on their trouble:
And kept in mind his agreement with them, and in his great mercy gave them forgiveness.
He put pity into the hearts of those who made them prisoners.
Be our saviour, O Lord our God, and let us come back together from among the nations, so that we may give honour to your holy name, and have glory in your praise.
Praise be to the Lord God of Israel for ever and for ever; and let all the people say, So be it. Give praise to the Lord.O give praise to the Lord, for he is good: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
Let those whose cause the Lord has taken up say so, his people whom he has taken out of the hands of their haters;
Making them come together out of all the lands, from the east and from the west, from the north and from the south.
They were wandering in the waste places; they saw no way to a resting-place.
Their souls became feeble for need of food and drink.
Then they sent up their cry to the Lord in their sorrow, and he gave them salvation out of all their troubles;
Guiding them in the right way, so that they might come into the town of their resting- place.
Let men give praise to the Lord for his mercy, and for the wonders which he does for the children of men!
He gives its desire to the unresting soul, so that it is full of good things.
Those who were in the dark, in the black night, in chains of sorrow and iron;
Because they went against the words of God, and gave no thought to the laws of the Most High:
So that he made their hearts weighted down with grief; they were falling, and had no helper.
Then they sent up their cry to the Lord in their sorrow, and he gave them salvation out of all their troubles.
He took them out of the dark and the black night, and all their chains were broken.
Let men give praise to the Lord for his mercy, and for the wonders which he does for the children of men!
The doors of brass are broken by his arm, and the bands of iron are cut in two.
Foolish men, because of their sins, and because of their wrongdoing, are troubled;
They are disgusted by all food, and they come near to the doors of death.
Then they send up their cry to the Lord in their sorrow, and he gives them salvation out of all their troubles.
He sent his word and made them well, and kept them safe from the underworld.
Let men give praise to the Lord for his mercy, and for the wonders which he does for the children of men!
Let them make offerings of praise, giving news of his works with cries of joy.
Those who go down to the sea in ships, who do business in the great waters;
They see the works of the Lord, and his wonders in the deep.
For at his word comes up the storm-wind, lifting high the waves.
The sailors go up to heaven, and down into the deep; their souls are wasted because of their trouble.
They are turned here and there, rolling like a man who is full of wine; and all their wisdom comes to nothing.
Then they send up their cry to the Lord in their sorrow, and he gives them salvation out of all their troubles.
He makes the storm into a calm, so that the waves are at peace.
Then they are glad, because the sea is quiet, and he takes them to the harbour of their desire.
Let men give praise to the Lord for his mercy, and for the wonders which he does for the children of men!
Let them give glory to him in the meeting of the people, and praise among the chiefs.
He makes rivers into waste places, and springs of water into a dry land;
He makes a fertile country into a salt waste, because of the sins of those who are living there.
He makes a waste land into a place of water, and a dry land into water-springs.
And there he gives the poor a resting-place, so that they may make themselves a town;
And put seed in the fields and make vine-gardens, to give them fruit.
He gives them his blessing so that they are increased greatly, and their cattle do not become less.
And when they are made low, and crushed by trouble and sorrow,
He puts an end to the pride of kings, and sends them wandering in the waste lands where there is no way.
But he puts the poor man on high from his troubles, and gives him families like a flock.
The upright see it and are glad: the mouth of the sinner is stopped.
Let the wise give thought to these things, and see the mercies of the Lord.A Song. A Psalm. Of David.
O God, my heart is fixed; I will make songs and melody, even with my glory.
Give out your sounds, O corded instruments: the dawn will be awaking with my song.
I will give you praise, O Lord, among the peoples; I will make melody to you among the nations.
For your mercy is higher than the heavens: and your unchanging faith than the clouds.
Be lifted up, O God, higher than the heavens; let your glory be over all the earth.
Let your right hand be stretched out for salvation, and give me an answer, so that your loved ones may be safe from danger.
This is the word of the holy God: I will be glad; I will make Shechem a heritage, measuring out the valley of Succoth.
Gilead is mine; Manasseh is mine; Ephraim is the strength of my head; Judah is my law-giver;
Moab is my washpot; on Edom is the resting-place of my shoe; over Philistia will I send out a glad cry.
Who will take me into the strong town? who will be my guide into Edom?
Have you not sent us away from you, O God? and you go not out with our armies.
Give us help in our trouble; for there is no help in man.
With God we will do great things; for by him will our haters be crushed underfoot.To the chief music-maker. Of David. A Psalm.
God of my praise, let my prayer be answered;
For the mouth of the sinner is open against me in deceit: his tongue has said false things against me.
Words of hate are round about me; they have made war against me without cause.
For my love they give me back hate; but I have given myself to prayer.
They have put on me evil for good; hate in exchange for my love.
Put an evil man over him; and let one be placed at his right hand to say evil of him.
When he is judged, let the decision go against him; and may his prayer become sin.
Let his life be short; let another take his position of authority.
Let his children have no father, and his wife be made a widow.
Let his children be wanderers, looking to others for their food; let them be sent away from the company of their friends.
Let his creditor take all his goods; and let others have the profit of his work.
Let no man have pity on him, or give help to his children when he is dead.
Let his seed be cut off; in the coming generation let their name go out of memory.
Let the Lord keep in mind the wrongdoing of his fathers; and may the sin of his mother have no forgiveness.
Let them be ever before the eyes of the Lord, so that the memory of them may be cut off from the earth.
Because he had no mercy, but was cruel to the low and the poor, designing the death of the broken-hearted.
As he took pleasure in cursing, so let it come on him; and as he had no delight in blessing, let it be far from him.
He put on cursing like a robe, and it has come into his body like water, and into his bones like oil.
Let it be to him as a robe which he puts on, let it be like a band which is round him at all times.
Let this be the reward given to my haters from the Lord, and to those who say evil of my soul.
But, O Lord God, give me your help, because of your name; take me out of danger, because your mercy is good.
For I am poor and in need, and my heart is wounded in me.
I am gone like the shade when it is stretched out: I am forced out of my place like a locust.
My knees are feeble for need of food; there is no fat on my bones.
As for me, they make sport of me; shaking their heads when they see me.
Give me help, O Lord my God; in your mercy be my saviour;
So that they may see that it is the work of your hand; that you, Lord, have done it.
They may give curses but you give blessing; when they come up against me, put them to shame; but let your servant be glad.
Let my haters be clothed with shame, covering themselves with shame as with a robe.
I will give the Lord great praise with my mouth; yes, I will give praise to him among all the people.
For he is ever at the right hand of the poor, to take him out of the hands of those who go after his soul.A Psalm. Of David.
The Lord said to my lord, Be seated at my right hand, till I put all those who are against you under your feet.
The Lord will send out the rod of your strength from Zion; be king over your haters.
Your people give themselves gladly in the day of your power; like the dew of the morning on the holy mountains is the army of your young men.
The Lord has made an oath, and will not take it back. You are a priest for ever, after the order of Melchizedek.
In the day of his wrath kings will be wounded by the Lord at your right hand.
He will be judge among the nations, the valleys will be full of dead bodies; the head over a great country will be wounded by him.
He will take of the stream by the way; so his head will be lifted up.Let the Lord be praised. I will give praise to the Lord with all my heart, among the upright, and in the meeting of the people.
The works of the Lord are great, searched out by all those who have delight in them.
His work is full of honour and glory; and his righteousness is unchanging for ever.
Certain for ever is the memory of his wonders: the Lord is full of pity and mercy.
He has given food to his worshippers; he will keep his agreement in mind for ever.
He has made clear to his people the power of his works, giving them the heritage of the nations.
The works of his hands are faith and righteousness; all his laws are unchanging.
They are fixed for ever and ever, they are done in faith and righteousness.
He has sent salvation to his people; he has given his word for ever: holy is his name and greatly to be feared.
The fear of the Lord is the best part of wisdom: all those who keep his laws are wise: his praise is eternal.Let the Lord be praised. Happy is the man who gives honour to the Lord, and has great delight in his laws.
His seed will be strong on the earth; blessings will be on the generation of the upright.
A store of wealth will be in his house, and his righteousness will be for ever.
For the upright there is a light shining in the dark; he is full of grace and pity.
All is well for the man who is kind and gives freely to others; he will make good his cause when he is judged.
He will not ever be moved; the memory of the upright will be living for ever.
He will have no fear of evil news; his heart is fixed, for his hope is in the Lord.
His heart is resting safely, he will have no fear, till he sees trouble come on his haters.
He has given with open hands to the poor; his righteousness is for ever; his horn will be lifted up with honour.
The sinner will see it with grief; he will be wasted away with envy; the desire of the evil-doers will come to nothing.Let the Lord be praised. O you servants of the Lord, give praise to the name of the Lord.
Let blessing be on the name of the Lord, from this time and for ever.
From the coming up of the sun to its going down, the Lord's name is to be praised.
The Lord is high over all nations, and his glory is higher than the heavens.
Who is like the Lord our God, who is seated on high,
Looking down on the heavens, and on the earth?
He takes the poor man out of the dust, lifting him up from his low position;
To give him a place among the rulers, even with the rulers of his people.
He gives the unfertile woman a family, making her a happy mother of children. Give praise to the Lord.When Israel came out of Egypt, the children of Jacob from a people whose language was strange to them;
Judah became his holy place, and Israel his kingdom.
The sea saw it, and went in flight; Jordan was turned back.
The mountains were jumping like goats, and the little hills like lambs.
What was wrong with you, O sea, that you went in flight? O Jordan, that you were turned back?
You mountains, why were you jumping like goats, and you little hills like lambs?
Be troubled, O earth, before the Lord, before the God of Jacob;
Who made the rock into a water-spring, and the hard stone into a fountain.Not to us, O Lord, not to us, but to your name let glory be given, because of your mercy and your unchanging faith.
Why may the nations say, Where is now their God?
But our God is in heaven: he has done whatever was pleasing to him.
Their images are silver and gold, the work of men's hands.
They have mouths, but no voice; they have eyes, but they see not;
They have ears, but no hearing; they have noses, but no sense of smell;
They have hands without feeling, and feet without power of walking; and no sound comes from their throat.
Those who make them are like them; and so is everyone who puts his faith in them.
O Israel, have faith in the Lord: he is their help and their breastplate.
O house of Aaron, have faith in the Lord: he is their help and their breastplate.
You worshippers of the Lord, have faith in the Lord: he is their help and their breastplate.
The Lord has kept us in mind and will give us his blessing; he will send blessings on the house of Israel and on the house of Aaron.
He will send blessings on the worshippers of the Lord, on the small and on the great.
May the Lord give you and your children still greater increase.
May you have the blessing of the Lord, who made heaven and earth.
The heavens are the Lord's; but the earth he has given to the children of men.
The dead do not give praise to the Lord; or those who go down to the underworld.
But we will give praise to the Lord now and for ever. Praise be to the Lord.I have given my love to the Lord, because he has given ear to the voice of my cry and my prayer.
He has let my request come before him, and I will make my prayer to him all my days.
The nets of death were round me, and the pains of the underworld had me in their grip; I was full of trouble and sorrow.
Then I made my prayer to the Lord, saying, O Lord, take my soul out of trouble.
The Lord is full of grace and righteousness; truly, he is a God of mercy.
The Lord keeps the simple; I was made low, and he was my saviour.
Come back to your rest, O my soul; for the Lord has given you your reward.
You have taken my soul from the power of death, keeping my eyes from weeping, and my feet from falling.
I will go before the Lord in the land of the living.
I still had faith, though I said, I am in great trouble;
Though I said in my fear, All men are false.
What may I give to the Lord for all the good things which he has done for me?
I will take the cup of salvation, and give praise to the name of the Lord.
I will make the offering of my oath to the Lord, even before all his people.
Dear in the eyes of the Lord is the death of his saints.
O Lord, truly I am your servant; I am your servant, the son of her who is your servant; by you have my cords been broken.
I will give an offering of praise to you, and make my prayer in the name of the Lord.
I will make the offerings of my oath, even before all his people;
In the Lord's house, even in Jerusalem. Praise be to the Lord.Let all the nations give praise to the Lord: let all the people give him praise.
For great is his mercy to us, and his faith is unchanging for ever. Praise be to the Lord.O give praise to the Lord, for he is good: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
Let Israel now say, that his mercy is unchanging for ever.
Let the house of Aaron now say, that his mercy is unchanging for ever.
Let all worshippers of the Lord now say, that his mercy is unchanging for ever.
I made my prayer to the Lord in my trouble: and the Lord gave me an answer, and put me in a wide place.
The Lord is on my side; I will have no fear: what is man able to do to me?
The Lord is my great helper: I will see my desire against my haters.
It is better to have faith in the Lord than to put one's hope in man.
It is better to have faith in the Lord than to put one's hope in rulers.
All the nations have come round me; but in the name of the Lord I will have them cut down.
They are round me, yes, they are all about me; but in the name of the Lord I will have them cut down.
They are round me like bees; but they are put out like a fire among thorns; for in the name of the Lord I will have them cut down.
I have been hard pushed by you, so that I might have a fall: but the Lord was my helper.
The Lord is my strength and my song; he has become my salvation.
The sound of joy and salvation is in the tents of the upright; the right hand of the Lord does works of power.
The right hand of the Lord is lifted up; the right hand of the Lord does works of power.
Life and not death will be my part, and I will give out the story of the works of the Lord.
The hand of Jah has been hard on me; but he has not given me up to death.
Let the doors of righteousness be open to me; I will go in and give praise to the Lord.
This is the door of the Lord's house; the workers of righteousness will go in through it.
I will give you praise, for you have given me an answer, and have become my salvation.
The stone which the builders put on one side has become the chief stone of the building.
This is the Lord's doing; it is a wonder in our eyes.
This is the day which the Lord has made; we will be full of joy and delight in it.
Send salvation now, O Lord; Lord, send us your blessing.
A blessing be on him who comes in the name of the Lord; we give you blessing from the house of the Lord.
The Lord is God, and he has given us light; let the holy dance be ordered with branches, even up to the horns of the altar.
You are my God, and I will give you praise; my God, and I will give honour to your name.
O give praise to the Lord, for he is good: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.A Song of the going up.
In my trouble my cry went up to the Lord, and he gave me an answer.
O Lord, be the saviour of my soul from false lips, and from the tongue of deceit.
What punishment will he give you? what more will he do to you, you false tongue?
Sharp arrows of the strong, and burning fire.
Sorrow is mine because I am strange in Meshech, and living in the tents of Kedar.
My soul has long been living with the haters of peace.
I am for peace: but when I say so, they are for war.A Song of the going up.
My eyes are lifted up to the hills: O where will my help come from?
Your help comes from the Lord, who made heaven and earth.
May he not let your foot be moved: no need of sleep has he who keeps you.
See, the eyes of Israel's keeper will not be shut in sleep.
The Lord is your keeper; the Lord is your shade on your right hand.
You will not be touched by the sun in the day, or by the moon at night.
The Lord will keep you safe from all evil; he will take care of your soul.
The Lord will keep watch over your going out and your coming in, from this time and for ever.A Song of the going up. Of David.
I was glad because they said to me, We will go into the house of the Lord.
At last our feet were inside your doors, O Jerusalem.
O Jerusalem, you are like a town which is well joined together;
To which the tribes went up, even the tribes of the Lord, for a witness to Israel, to give praise to the name of the Lord.
For there seats for the judges were placed, even the rulers' seats of the line of David.
O make prayers for the peace of Jerusalem; may they whose love is given to you do well.
May peace be inside your walls, and wealth in your noble houses.
Because of my brothers and friends, I will now say, Let peace be with you.
Because of the house of the Lord our God, I will be working for your good.A Song of the going up.
To you my eyes are lifted up, even to you whose seat is in the heavens.
See! as the eyes of servants are turned to the hands of their masters, and the eyes of a servant-girl to her owner, so our eyes are waiting for the Lord our God, till he has mercy on us.
Have mercy on us, O Lord, have mercy on us: for all men are looking down on us.
For long enough have men of pride made sport of our soul.A Song of the going up. Of David.
If it had not been the Lord who was on our side (let Israel now say);
If it had not been the Lord who was on our side, when men came up against us;
They would have made a meal of us while still living, in the heat of their wrath against us:
We would have been covered by the waters; the streams would have gone over our soul;
Yes, the waters of pride would have gone over our soul.
Praise be to the Lord, who has not let us be wounded by their teeth.
Our soul has gone free like a bird out of the net of those who would take her: the net is broken, and we are free.
Our help is in the name of the Lord, the maker of heaven and earth.A Song of the going up.
Those whose hope is in the Lord are like the mountain of Zion, which may not be moved, but keeps its place for ever.
As the mountains are round about Jerusalem, so the Lord is round about his people, from this time and for ever.
For the rod of sinners will not be resting on the heritage of the upright; so that the upright may not put out their hands to evil.
Do good, O Lord, to those who are good, and to those who are upright in heart.
But as for such as are turned out of the straight way, the Lord will take them away with the workers of evil. Let peace be on Israel.A Song of the going up.
When the Lord made a change in Zion's fate, we were like men in a dream.
Then our mouths were full of laughing, and our tongues gave a glad cry; they said among the nations, The Lord has done great things for them.
The Lord has done great things for us; because of which we are glad.
Let our fate be changed, O Lord, like the streams in the South.
Those who put in seed with weeping will get in the grain with cries of joy.
Though a man may go out weeping, taking his vessel of seed with him; he will come again in joy, with the corded stems of grain in his arms.A Song of the going up. Of Solomon.
If the Lord is not helping the builders, then the building of a house is to no purpose: if the Lord does not keep the town, the watchman keeps his watch for nothing.
It is of no use for you to get up early, and to go late to your rest, with the bread of sorrow for your food; for the Lord gives to his loved ones in sleep.
See, sons are a heritage from the Lord; the fruit of the body is his reward.
Like arrows in the hand of a man of war, are the children of the young.
Happy is the man who has a good store of them; he will not be put to shame, but his cause will be supported by them against his haters.A Song of the going up.
Happy is the worshipper of the Lord, who is walking in his ways.
You will have the fruit of the work of your hands: happy will you be, and all will be well for you.
Your wife will be like a fertile vine in the inmost parts of your house: your children will be like olive plants round your table.
See! this is the blessing of the worshipper of the Lord.
May the Lord send you blessing out of Zion: may you see the good of Jerusalem all the days of your life.
May you see your children's children. Peace be on Israel.A Song of the going up.
Great have been my troubles from the time when I was young (let Israel now say);
Great have been my troubles from the time when I was young, but my troubles have not overcome me.
The ploughmen were ploughing on my back; long were the wounds they made.
The Lord is true: the cords of the evil-doers are broken in two.
Let all the haters of Zion be shamed and turned back.
Let them be like the grass on the house-tops, which is dry before it comes to full growth.
He who gets in the grain has no use for it; and they do not make bands of it for the grain-stems.
And those who go by do not say, The blessing of the Lord be on you; we give you blessing in the name of the Lord.A Song of the going up.
Out of the deep have I sent up my cry to you, O Lord.
Lord, let my voice come before you: let your ears be awake to the voice of my prayer.
O Jah, if you took note of every sin, who would go free?
But there is forgiveness with you, so that you may be feared.
I am waiting for the Lord, my soul is waiting for him, and my hope is in his word.
My soul is watching for the Lord more than those who are watching for the morning; yes, more than the watchers for the morning.
O Israel, have hope in the Lord; for with the Lord is mercy and full salvation.
And he will make Israel free from all his sins.A Song of the going up. Of David.
Lord, there is no pride in my heart and my eyes are not lifted up; and I have not taken part in great undertakings, or in things over-hard for me.
See, I have made my soul calm and quiet, like a child on its mother's breast; my soul is like a child on its mother's breast.
O Israel, have hope in the Lord, from this time and for ever.A Song of the going up.
Lord, give thought to David, and to all his troubles;
How he made an oath to the Lord, and gave his word to the great God of Jacob, saying,
Truly, I will not come into my house, or go to my bed,
I will not give sleep to my eyes, or rest to my eyeballs,
Till I have got a place for the Lord, a resting-place for the great God of Jacob.
We had news of it at Ephrathah: we came to it in the fields of the wood.
Let us go into his tent; let us give worship at his feet.
Come back, O Lord, to your resting-place; you and the ark of your strength.
Let your priests be clothed with righteousness; and let your saints give cries of joy.
Because of your servant David, do not give up your king.
The Lord gave a true oath to David, which he will not take back, saying, I will give your kingdom to the fruit of your body.
If your children keep my word, and the teachings which I will give them, their children will be rulers of your kingdom for ever.
For the Lord's heart is on Zion, desiring it for his resting-place.
This is my rest for ever: here will I ever be; for this is my desire.
My blessing will be on her food; and her poor will be full of bread.
Her priests will be clothed with salvation; and her saints will give cries of joy.
There I will make the horn of David fertile: I have made ready a light for my king.
His haters will be clothed with shame; but I will make his crown shining.A Song of the going up. Of David.
See how good and how pleasing it is for brothers to be living together in harmony!
It is like oil of great price on the head, flowing down over the face, even Aaron's face: coming down to the edge of his robe;
Like the dew of Hermon, which comes down on the mountains of Zion: for there the Lord gave orders for the blessing, even life for ever.A Song of the going up.
Give praise to the Lord, all you servants of the Lord, who take your places in the house of the Lord by night.
Give praise to the Lord, lifting up your hands in his holy place.
May the Lord, who made heaven and earth, send you blessing out of Zion,Let the Lord be praised. O you servants of the Lord, give praise to the name of the Lord.
You who are in the house of the Lord, and in the open spaces of the house of our God,
Give praise to Jah, for he is good: make melody to his name, for it is pleasing.
For the Lord has taken Jacob for himself, and Israel for his property.
I know that the Lord is great, and that our Lord is greater than all other gods.
The Lord has done whatever was pleasing to him, in heaven, and on the earth, in the seas and in all the deep waters.
He makes the mists go up from the ends of the earth; he makes thunder-flames for the rain; he sends out the winds from his store-houses.
He put to death the first-fruits of Egypt, of man and of beast.
He sent signs and wonders among you, O Egypt, on Pharaoh, and on all his servants.
He overcame great nations, and put strong kings to death;
Sihon, king of the Amorites, and Og, king of Bashan, and all the kingdoms of Canaan;
And gave their land for a heritage, even for a heritage to Israel his people.
O Lord, your name is eternal; and the memory of you will have no end.
For the Lord will be judge of his people's cause; his feelings will be changed to his servants.
The images of the nations are silver and gold, the work of men's hands.
They have mouths, but no voice, they have eyes, but they do not see;
They have ears, but no hearing; and there is no breath in their mouths.
Those who make them are like them; and so is everyone who puts his hope in them.
Give praise to the Lord, O children of Israel: give praise to the Lord, O sons of Aaron:
Give praise to the Lord, O sons of Levi: let all the worshippers of the Lord give him praise.
Praise be to the Lord out of Zion, even to the Lord whose house is in Jerusalem, Let the Lord be praised.O give praise to the Lord, for he is good: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
O give praise to the God of gods: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
O give praise to the Lord of lords: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
To him who only does great wonders: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
To him who by wisdom made the heavens: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
To him by whom the earth was stretched out over the waters: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
To him who made great lights: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
The sun to have rule by day: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
The moon and the stars to have rule by night: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
To him who put to death the first-fruits of Egypt: for his mercy is unchanging for ever:
And took out Israel from among them: for his mercy is unchanging for ever:
With a strong hand and an outstretched arm: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
To him who made a way through the Red Sea: for his mercy is unchanging for ever:
And let Israel go through it: for his mercy is unchanging for ever:
By him Pharaoh and his army were overturned in the Red Sea: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
To him who took his people through the waste land: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
To him who overcame great kings: for his mercy is unchanging for ever:
And put noble kings to death: for his mercy is unchanging for ever:
Sihon, king of the Amorites: for his mercy is unchanging for ever:
And Og, king of Bashan: for his mercy is unchanging for ever:
And gave their land to his people for a heritage: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
Even a heritage for his servant Israel: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
Who kept us in mind when we were in trouble: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
And has taken us out of the hands of our haters: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
Who gives food to all flesh: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
O give praise to the God of heaven: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.By the rivers of Babylon we were seated, weeping at the memory of Zion,
Hanging our instruments of music on the trees by the waterside.
For there those who had taken us prisoners made request for a song; and those who had taken away all we had gave us orders to be glad, saying, Give us one of the songs of Zion.
How may we give the Lord's song in a strange land?
If I keep not your memory, O Jerusalem, let not my right hand keep the memory of its art.
If I let you go out of my thoughts, and if I do not put Jerusalem before my greatest joy, let my tongue be fixed to the roof of my mouth.
O Lord, keep in mind against the children of Edom the day of Jerusalem; how they said, Let it be uncovered, uncovered even to its base.
O daughter of Babylon, whose fate is destruction; happy is the man who does to you what you have done to us.
Happy is the man who takes your little ones, crushing them against the rocks.Of David.
I will give you praise with all my heart: I will make melody to you before the gods.
I will give worship before your holy Temple, praising your name for your mercy and for your unchanging faith: for you have made your word greater than all your name.
When my cry came to your ears you gave me an answer, and made me great with strength in my soul.
All the kings of the earth will give you praise, O Lord, when the words of your mouth come to their ears.
They will make songs about the ways of the Lord; for great is the glory of the Lord.
Though the Lord is high, he sees those who are low; and he has knowledge from far off of those who are lifted up.
Even when trouble is round me, you will give me life; your hand will be stretched out against the wrath of my haters, and your right hand will be my salvation.
The Lord will make all things complete for me: O Lord, your mercy is eternal; do not give up the works of your hands.To the chief music-maker. A Psalm. Of David.
O Lord, you have knowledge of me, searching out all my secrets.
You have knowledge when I am seated and when I get up, you see my thoughts from far away.
You keep watch over my steps and my sleep, and have knowledge of all my ways.
For there is not a word on my tongue which is not clear to you, O Lord.
I am shut in by you on every side, and you have put your hand on me.
Such knowledge is a wonder greater than my powers; it is so high that I may not come near it.
Where may I go from your spirit? how may I go in flight from you?
If I go up to heaven, you are there: or if I make my bed in the underworld, you are there.
If I take the wings of the morning, and go to the farthest parts of the sea;
Even there will I be guided by your hand, and your right hand will keep me.
If I say, Only let me be covered by the dark, and the light about me be night;
Even the dark is not dark to you; the night is as bright as the day: for dark and light are the same to you.
My flesh was made by you, and my parts joined together in my mother's body.
I will give you praise, for I am strangely and delicately formed; your works are great wonders, and of this my soul is fully conscious.
My frame was not unseen by you when I was made secretly, and strangely formed in the lowest parts of the earth.
Your eyes saw my unformed substance; in your book all my days were recorded, even those which were purposed before they had come into being.
How dear are your thoughts to me, O God! how great is the number of them!
If I made up their number, it would be more than the grains of sand; when I am awake, I am still with you.
If only you would put the sinners to death, O God; go far from me, you men of blood.
For they go against you with evil designs, and your haters make sport of your name.
Are not your haters hated by me, O Lord? are not those who are lifted up against you a cause of grief to me?
My hate for them is complete; my thoughts of them are as if they were making war on me.
O God, let the secrets of my heart be uncovered, and let my wandering thoughts be tested:
See if there is any way of sorrow in me, and be my guide in the eternal way.To the chief music-maker. A Psalm. Of David.
O Lord, take me out of the power of the evil man; keep me safe from the violent man:
For their hearts are full of evil designs; and they are ever making ready causes of war.
Their tongues are sharp like the tongue of a snake; the poison of snakes is under their lips. (Selah.)
O Lord, take me out of the hands of sinners; keep me safe from the violent man: for they are designing my downfall.
The men of pride have put secret cords for my feet; stretching nets in my way, so that they may take me with their tricks. (Selah.)
I have said to the Lord, You are my God: give ear, O Lord, to the voice of my prayer.
O Lord God, the strength of my salvation, you have been a cover over my head in the day of the fight.
O Lord, give not the wrongdoer his desire; give him no help in his evil designs, or he may be uplifted in pride. (Selah.)
As for those who come round me, let their heads be covered by the evil of their lips.
Let burning flames come down on them: let them be put into the fire, and into deep waters, so that they may not get up again.
Let not a man of evil tongue be safe on earth: let destruction overtake the violent man with blow on blow.
I am certain that the Lord will take care of the cause of the poor, and of the rights of those who are troubled.
Truly, the upright will give praise to your name: the holy will have a place in your house.A Psalm. Of David.
Lord, I have made my cry to you; come to me quickly; give ear to my voice, when it goes up to you.
Let my prayer be ordered before you like a sweet smell; and let the lifting up of my hands be like the evening offering.
O Lord, keep a watch over my mouth; keep the door of my lips.
Keep my heart from desiring any evil thing, or from taking part in the sins of the evil- doers with men who do wrong: and let me have no part in their good things.
Let the upright give me punishment; and let the god-fearing man put me in the right way; but I will not let the oil of sinners come on my head: when they do evil I will give myself to prayer.
When destruction comes to their judges by the side of the rock, they will give ear to my words, for they are sweet.
Our bones are broken up at the mouth of the underworld, as the earth is broken by the plough.
But my eyes are turned to you, O Lord God: my hope is in you; let not my soul be given up to death.
Keep me from the net which they have put down for me, and from the designs of the workers of evil.
Let the sinners be taken in the nets which they themselves have put down, while I go free.Maschil. Of David. A prayer when he was in the hole of the rock.
The sound of my cry went up to the Lord; with my voice I made my prayer for grace to the Lord.
I put all my sorrows before him; and made clear to him all my trouble.
When my spirit is overcome, your eyes are on my goings; nets have been secretly placed in the way in which I go.
Looking to my right side, I saw no man who was my friend: I had no safe place; no one had any care for my soul.
I have made my cry to you, O Lord; I have said, You are my safe place, and my heritage in the land of the living.
Give ear to my cry, for I am made very low: take me out of the hands of my haters, for they are stronger than I.
Take my soul out of prison, so that I may give praise to your name: the upright will give praise because of me; for you have given me a full reward.A Psalm. Of David.
Let my prayer come to you, O Lord; give ear to my requests for your grace; keep faith with me, and give me an answer in your righteousness;
Let not your servant come before you to be judged; for no man living is upright in your eyes.
The evil man has gone after my soul; my life is crushed down to the earth: he has put me in the dark, like those who have long been dead.
Because of this my spirit is overcome; and my heart is full of fear.
I keep in mind the early days of the past, giving thought to all your acts, even to the work of your hands.
My hands are stretched out to you: my soul is turned to you, like a land in need of water. (Selah.)
Be quick in answering me, O Lord, for the strength of my spirit is gone: let me see your face, so that I may not be like those who go down into the underworld.
Let the story of your mercy come to me in the morning, for my hope is in you: give me knowledge of the way in which I am to go; for my soul is lifted up to you.
O Lord, take me out of the hands of my haters; my soul is waiting for you.
Give me teaching so that I may do your pleasure; for you are my God: let your good Spirit be my guide into the land of righteousness.
Give me life, O Lord, because of your name; in your righteousness take my soul out of trouble.
And in your mercy put an end to my haters, and send destruction on all those who are against my soul; for I am your servant.A Psalm. Of David.
Praise be to the God of my strength, teaching my hands the use of the sword, and my fingers the art of fighting:
He is my strength, and my Rock; my high tower, and my saviour; my keeper and my hope: he gives me authority over my people.
Lord, what is man, that you keep him in mind? or the son of man that you take him into account?
Man is like a breath: his life is like a shade which is quickly gone.
Come down, O Lord, from your heavens: at your touch let the mountains give out smoke.
With your storm-flames send them in flight: send out your arrows for their destruction.
Put out your hand from on high; make me free, take me safely out of the great waters, and out of the hands of strange men;
In whose mouths are false words, and whose right hand is a right hand of deceit.
I will make a new song to you, O God; I will make melody to you on an instrument of ten cords.
It is God who gives salvation to kings; and who kept his servant David from the wounding sword.
Make me free, and take me out of the hands of strange men, in whose mouths are false words, and whose right hand is a right hand of deceit.
Our sons are like tall young plants; and our daughters like the shining stones of a king's house;
Our store-houses are full of all good things; and our sheep give birth to thousands and ten thousands in our fields.
Our oxen are well weighted down; our cows give birth safely; there is no going out, and there is no cry of sorrow in our open places.
Happy is the nation whose ways are so ordered: yes, happy is the nation whose God is the Lord.A Song of praise. Of David.
Let me give glory to you, O God, my King; and blessing to your name for ever and ever.
Every day will I give you blessing, praising your name for ever and ever.
Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised; his power may never be searched out.
One generation after another will give praise to your great acts, and make clear the operation of your strength.
My thoughts will be of the honour and glory of your rule, and of the wonder of your works.
Men will be talking of the power and fear of your acts; I will give word of your glory.
Their sayings will be full of the memory of all your mercy, and they will make songs of your righteousness.
The Lord is full of grace and pity; not quickly angry, but great in mercy.
The Lord is good to all men; and his mercies are over all his works.
Alltheworksofyourhandsgivepraisetoyou, OLord; andyoursaintsgiveyoublessing.
Their words will be of the glory of your kingdom, and their talk of your strength;
So that the sons of men may have knowledge of his acts of power, and of the great glory of his kingdom.
Your kingdom is an eternal kingdom, and your rule is through all generations.
The Lord is the support of all who are crushed, and the lifter up of all who are bent down.
The eyes of all men are waiting for you; and you give them their food in its time.
By the opening of your hand, every living thing has its desire in full measure.
The Lord is upright in all his ways, and kind in all his works.
The Lord is near all those who give honour to his name; even to all who give honour to him with true hearts.
To his worshippers, he will give their desire; their cry comes to his ears, and he gives them salvation.
The Lord will keep all his worshippers from danger; but he will send destruction on all sinners.
My mouth will give praise to the Lord; let all flesh be blessing his holy name for ever and ever.Let the Lord be praised. Give praise to the Lord, O my soul.
While I have breath I will give praise to the Lord: I will make melody to my God while I have my being.
Put not your faith in rulers, or in the son of man, in whom there is no salvation.
Man's breath goes out, he is turned back again to dust; in that day all his purposes come to an end.
Happy is the man who has the God of Jacob for his help, whose hope is in the Lord his God:
Who made heaven and earth, the sea, and all things in them; who keeps faith for ever:
Who gives their rights to those who are crushed down; and gives food to those who are in need of it: the Lord makes the prisoners free;
The Lord makes open the eyes of the blind; the Lord is the lifter up of those who are bent down; the Lord is a lover of the upright;
The Lord takes care of those who are in a strange land; he gives help to the widow and to the child who has no father; but he sends destruction on the way of sinners.
The Lord will be King for ever; your God, O Zion, will be King through all generations. Praise be to the Lord.Give praise to the Lord; for it is good to make melody to our God; praise is pleasing and beautiful.
The Lord is building up Jerusalem; he makes all the outlaws of Israel come together.
He makes the broken-hearted well, and puts oil on their wounds.
He sees the number of the stars; he gives them all their names.
Great is our Lord, and great his power; there is no limit to his wisdom.
The Lord gives help to the poor in spirit; but he sends sinners down in shame.
Make songs of praise to the Lord; make melody to our God with instruments of music.
By his hand the heaven is covered with clouds and rain is stored up for the earth; he makes the grass tall on the mountains.
He gives food to every beast, and to the young ravens in answer to their cry.
He has no delight in the strength of a horse; he takes no pleasure in the legs of a man.
The Lord takes pleasure in his worshippers, and in those whose hope is in his mercy.
Give praise to the Lord, O Jerusalem; give praise to your God, O Zion.
He has made strong the iron bands of your doors; he has sent blessings on your children inside your walls.
He gives peace in all your land, making your stores full of fat grain.
He sends out his orders to the earth; his word goes out quickly.
He gives snow like wool; he sends out ice-drops like dust.
He sends down ice like raindrops: water is made hard by his cold.
At the outgoing of his word, the ice is turned to water; when he sends out his wind, there is a flowing of waters.
He makes his word clear to Jacob, teaching Israel his laws and his decisions.
He has not done these things for any other nation: and as for his laws, they have no knowledge of them. Let the Lord be praised.Give praise to the Lord. Let the Lord be praised from the heavens: give him praise in the skies.
Give praise to him, all you his angels: give praise to him, all his armies.
Give praise to him, you sun and moon: give praise to him, all you stars of light.
Give praise to him, you highest heavens, and you waters which are over the heavens.
Let them give praise to the name of the Lord: for he gave the order, and they were made.
He has put them in their places for ever; he has given them their limits which may not be broken.
Give praise to the Lord from the earth, you great sea-beasts, and deep places:
Fire and rain of ice, snow and mists; storm-wind, doing his word:
Mountains and all hills; fruit-trees and all trees of the mountains:
Beasts and all cattle; insects and winged birds:
Kings of the earth, and all peoples; rulers and all judges of the earth:
Young men and virgins; old men and children:
Let them give glory to the name of the Lord: for his name only is to be praised: his kingdom is over the earth and the heaven.
He has put on high the horn of his people, for the praise of all his saints; even the children of Israel, a people which is near to him. Let the Lord be praised.Let the Lord be praised. Make a new song to the Lord, let his praise be in the meeting of his saints.
Let Israel have joy in his maker; let the children of Zion be glad in their King.
Let them give praise to his name in the dance: let them make melody to him with instruments of brass and corded instruments of music.
For the Lord has pleasure in his people: he gives the poor in spirit a crown of salvation.
Let the saints have joy and glory: let them give cries of joy on their beds.
Let the high praises of God be in their mouths, and a two-edged sword in their hands;
To give the nations the reward of their sins, and the peoples their punishment;
To put their kings in chains, and their rulers in bands of iron;
To give them the punishment which is in the holy writings: this honour is given to all his saints. Praise be to the Lord.Let the Lord be praised. Give praise to God in his holy place: give him praise in the heaven of his power.
Give him praise for his acts of power: give him praise in the measure of his great strength.
Give him praise with the sound of the horn: give him praise with corded instruments of music.
Give him praise with instruments of brass and in the dance: give him praise with horns and corded instruments.
Give him praise with the loud brass: give him praise with the high-sounding brass.
Let everything which has breath give praise to the Lord. Let the Lord be praised.Happy is the man who does not go in the company of sinners, or take his place in the way of evil-doers, or in the seat of those who do not give honour to the Lord.
But whose delight is in the law of the Lord, and whose mind is on his law day and night.
He will be like a tree planted by the rivers of water, which gives its fruit at the right time, whose leaves will ever be green; and he will do well in all his undertakings.
The evil-doers are not so; but are like the dust from the grain, which the wind takes away.
For this cause there will be no mercy for sinners when they are judged, and the evil- doers will have no place among the upright,
Because the Lord sees the way of the upright, but the end of the sinner is destruction.A Psalm. Of David. When he went in flight from Absalom his son.
Lord, how greatly are they increased who make attacks on me! in great numbers they come against me.
Unnumbered are those who say of my soul, There is no help for him in God. (Selah.)
But your strength, O Lord, is round me, you are my glory and the lifter up of my head.
I send up a cry to the Lord with my voice, and he gives me an answer from his holy hill. (Selah.)
I took my rest in sleep, and then again I was awake; for the Lord was my support.
I will have no fear, though ten thousand have come round me, putting themselves against me.
Come to me, Lord; keep me safe, O my God; for you have given all my haters blows on their face-bones; the teeth of the evil-doers have been broken by you.
Salvation comes from the Lord; your blessing is on your people. (Selah.)To the chief music-maker on corded instruments. A Psalm. Of David.
Give answer to my cry, O God of my righteousness; make me free from my troubles; have mercy on me, and give ear to my prayer.
O you sons of men, how long will you go on turning my glory into shame? how long will you give your love to foolish things, going after what is false? (Selah.)
See how the Lord has made great his mercy for me; the Lord will give ear to my cry.
Let there be fear in your hearts, and do no sin; have bitter feelings on your bed, but make no sound. (Selah.)
Give the offerings of righteousness, and put your faith in the Lord.
There are numbers who say, Who will do us any good? the light of his face has gone from us.
Lord, you have put joy in my heart, more than they have when their grain and their wine are increased.
I will take my rest on my bed in peace, because you only, Lord, keep me safe.To the chief music-maker on wind instruments. A Psalm. Of David.
Give ear to my words, O Lord; give thought to my heart-searchings.
Let the voice of my cry come to you, my King and my God; for to you will I make my prayer.
My voice will come to you in the morning, O Lord; in the morning will I send my prayer to you, and keep watch.
For you are not a God who takes pleasure in wrongdoing; there is no evil with you.
The sons of pride have no place before you; you are a hater of all workers of evil.
You will send destruction on those whose words are false; the cruel man and the man of deceit are hated by the Lord.
But as for me, I will come into your house, in the full measure of your mercy; and in your fear I will give worship, turning my eyes to your holy Temple.
Be my guide, O Lord, in the ways of your righteousness, because of those who are against me; make your way straight before my face.
For no faith may be put in their words; their inner part is nothing but evil; their throat is like an open place for the dead; smooth are the words of their tongues.
Send them to destruction, O Lord; let their evil designs be the cause of their fall; let them be forced out by all their sins; because they have gone against your authority.
But let all those who put their faith in you be glad with cries of joy at all times, and let all the lovers of your name be glad in you.
For you, Lord, will send a blessing on the upright man; your grace will be round him, and you will be his strength.To the chief music-maker on corded instruments, on the Sheminith. A Psalm. Of David.
O Lord, do not be bitter with me in your wrath; do not send punishment on me in the heat of your passion.
Have mercy on me, O Lord, for I am wasted away: make me well, for even my bones are troubled.
My soul is in bitter trouble; and you, O Lord, how long?
Come back, O Lord, make my soul free; O give me salvation because of your mercy.
For in death there is no memory of you; in the underworld who will give you praise?
The voice of my sorrow is a weariness to me; all the night I make my bed wet with weeping; it is watered by the drops flowing from my eyes.
My eyes are wasting away with trouble; they are becoming old because of all those who are against me.
Go from me, all you workers of evil; for the Lord has given ear to the voice of my weeping.
The Lord has given ear to my request; the Lord has let my prayer come before him.
Let all those who are against me be shamed and deeply troubled; let them be turned back and suddenly put to shame.Shiggaion of David; a song which he made to the Lord, about the words of Cush the Benjamite.
O Lord my God, I put my faith in you; take me out of the hands of him who is cruel to me, and make me free;
So that he may not come rushing on my soul like a lion, wounding it, while there is no one to be my saviour.
O Lord my God, if I have done this; if my hands have done any wrong;
If I have given back evil to him who did evil to me, or have taken anything from him who was against me without cause;
Let my hater go after my soul and take it; let my life be crushed to the earth, and my honour into the dust. (Selah.)
Come up, Lord, in your wrath; be lifted up against my haters; be awake, my God, give orders for the judging.
The meeting of the nations will be round you; take your seat, then, over them, on high.
The Lord will be judge of the peoples; give a decision for me, O Lord, because of my righteousness, and let my virtue have its reward.
O let the evil of the evil-doer come to an end, but give strength to the upright: for men's minds and hearts are tested by the God of righteousness.
God, who is the saviour of the upright in heart, is my breastplate.
God is the judge of the upright, and is angry with the evil-doers every day.
If a man is not turned from his evil, he will make his sword sharp; his bow is bent and ready.
He has made ready for him the instruments of death; he makes his arrows flames of fire.
That man is a worker of evil; the seed of wrongdoing has given birth to deceit.
He has made a hole deep in the earth, and is falling into the hole which he has made
His wrongdoing will come back to him, and his violent behaviour will come down on his head.
I will give praise to the Lord for his righteousness; I will make a song to the name of the Lord Most High.To the chief music-maker on the Gittith. A Psalm. Of David.
O Lord, our Lord, whose glory is higher than the heavens, how noble is your name in all the earth!
You have made clear your strength even out of the mouths of babies at the breast, because of those who are against you; so that you may put to shame the cruel and violent man.
When I see your heavens, the work of your fingers, the moon and the stars, which you have put in their places;
What is man, that you keep him in mind? the son of man, that you take him into account?
For you have made him only a little lower than the gods, crowning him with glory and honour.
You have made him ruler over the works of your hands; you have put all things under his feet;
All sheep and oxen, and all the beasts of the field;
The birds of the air and the fish of the sea, and whatever goes through the deep waters of the seas.
O Lord, our Lord, how noble is your name in all the earth!To the chief music-maker on Muthlabben. A Psalm. Of David.
I will give you praise, O Lord, with all my heart; I will make clear all the wonder of your works.
I will be glad and have delight in you: I will make a song of praise to your name, O Most High.
When my haters are turned back, they will be broken and overcome before you.
For you gave approval to my right and my cause; you were seated in your high place judging in righteousness.
You have said sharp words to the nations, you have sent destruction on the sinners, you have put an end to their name for ever and ever.
You have given their towns to destruction; the memory of them has gone; they have become waste for ever.
But the Lord is King for ever: he has made ready his high seat for judging.
And he will be the judge of the world in righteousness, giving true decisions for the peoples.
The Lord will be a high tower for those who are crushed down, a high tower in times of trouble;
And those who have knowledge of your name will put their faith in you; because you, Lord, have ever given your help to those who were waiting for you.
Make songs of praise to the Lord, whose house is in Zion: make his doings clear to the people.
When he makes search for blood, he has them in his memory: he is not without thought for the cry of the poor.
Have mercy on me, O Lord, and see how I am troubled by my haters; let me be lifted up from the doors of death;
So that I may make clear all your praise in the house of the daughter of Zion: I will be glad because of your salvation.
The nations have gone down into the hole which they made: in their secret net is their foot taken.
The Lord has given knowledge of himself through his judging: the evil-doer is taken in the net which his hands had made. (Higgaion. Selah.)
The sinners and all the nations who have no memory of God will be turned into the underworld.
For the poor will not be without help; the hopes of those in need will not be crushed for ever.
Up! O Lord; let not man overcome you: let the nations be judged before you.
Put them in fear, O Lord, so that the nations may see that they are only men. (Selah.)Why do you keep far away, O Lord? why are you not to be seen in times of trouble?
The evil-doer in his pride is cruel to the poor; let him be taken by the tricks of his invention.
For the evil-doer is lifted up because of the purpose of his heart, and he whose mind is fixed on wealth is turned away from the Lord, saying evil against him.
The evil-doer in his pride says, God will not make a search. All his thoughts are, There is no God.
His ways are ever fixed; your decisions are higher than he may see: as for his haters, they are as nothing to him.
He has said in his heart, I will not be moved: through all generations I will never be in trouble.
His mouth is full of cursing and deceit and false words: under his tongue are evil purposes and dark thoughts.
He is waiting in the dark places of the towns: in the secret places he puts to death those who have done no wrong: his eyes are secretly turned against the poor.
He keeps himself in a secret place like a lion in his hole, waiting to put his hands on the poor man, and pulling him into his net.
The upright are crushed and made low, and the feeble are overcome by his strong ones.
He says in his heart, God has no memory of me: his face is turned away; he will never see it.
Up! O Lord; let your hand be lifted: give thought to the poor.
Why has the evil-doer a low opinion of God, saying in his heart, You will not make search for it?
You have seen it; for your eyes are on sorrow and grief, to take it into your hand: the poor man puts his faith in you; you have been the helper of the child who has no father.
Let the arm of the sinner and the evil-doer be broken; go on searching for his sin till there is no more.
The Lord is King for ever and ever; the nations are gone from his land.
Lord, you have given ear to the prayer of the poor: you will make strong their hearts, you will give them a hearing:
To give decision for the child without a father and for the broken-hearted, so that the man of the earth may no longer be feared.For the chief music-maker. Of David.
In the Lord put I my faith; how will you say to my soul, Go in flight like a bird to the mountain?
See, the bows of the evil-doers are bent, they make ready their arrows on the cord, so that they may send them secretly against the upright in heart.
If the bases are broken down, what is the upright man to do?
The Lord is in his holy Temple, the Lord's seat is in heaven; his eyes are watching and testing the children of men.
The Lord puts the upright and the sinner to the test, but he has hate in his soul for the lover of violent acts.
On the evil-doer he will send down fire and flames, and a burning wind; with these will their cup be full.
For the Lord is upright; he is a lover of righteousness: the upright will see his face.For the chief music-maker on the Sheminith. A Psalm. Of David.
Send help, Lord, for mercy has come to an end; there is no more faith among the children of men.
Everyone says false words to his neighbour: their tongues are smooth in their talk, and their hearts are full of deceit.
The smooth lips and the tongue of pride will be cut off by the Lord.
They have said, With our tongues will we overcome; our lips are ours: who is lord over us?
Because of the crushing of the poor and the weeping of those in need, now will I come to his help, says the Lord; I will give him the salvation which he is desiring.
The words of the Lord are true words: like silver tested by fire and burned clean seven times.
You will keep them, O Lord, you will keep them safe from this generation for ever.
The sinners are walking on every side, and evil is honoured among the children of men.To the chief music-maker. A Psalm. Of David.
Will you for ever put me out of your memory, O Lord? will your face for ever be turned away from me?
How long is my soul to be in doubt, with sorrow in my heart all the day? how long will he who is against me be given power over me?
Let my voice come before you, and give me an answer, O Lord my God; let your light be shining on me, so that the sleep of death may not overtake me;
And he who is against me may not say, I have overcome him; and those who are troubling me may not be glad when I am moved.
But I have had faith in your mercy; my heart will be glad in your salvation.
I will make a song to the Lord, because he has given me my reward.To the chief music-maker. Of David.
The foolish man has said in his heart, God will not do anything. They are unclean, they have done evil works; there is not one who does good.
The Lord was looking down from heaven on the children of men, to see if there were any who had wisdom, searching after God.
They have all gone out of the way together; they are unclean, there is not one who does good, no, not one.
Have all the workers of evil no knowledge? they take my people for food as they would take bread; they make no prayer to the Lord.
Then were they in great fear: for God is in the generation of the upright.
You have put to shame the thoughts of the poor, but the Lord is his support.
May the salvation of Israel come out of Zion! when the fate of his people is changed by the Lord, Jacob will have joy and Israel will be glad.A Psalm. Of David.
Lord, who may have a resting-place in your tent, a living-place on your holy hill?
He who goes on his way uprightly, doing righteousness, and saying what is true in his heart;
Whose tongue is not false, who does no evil to his friend, and does not take away the good name of his neighbour;
Who gives honour to those who have the fear of the Lord, turning away from him who has not the Lord's approval. He who takes an oath against himself, and makes no change.
He who does not put out his money at interest, or for payment give false decisions against men who have done no wrong. He who does these things will never be moved.Michtam. Of David.
Keep me safe, O God: for in you I have put my faith.
O my soul, you have said to the Lord, You are my Lord: I have no good but you.
As for the saints who are in the earth, they are the noble in whom is all my delight.
Their sorrows will be increased who go after another god: I will not take drink offerings from their hands, or take their names on my lips.
The Lord is my heritage and the wine of my cup; you are the supporter of my right.
Fair are the places marked out for me; I have a noble heritage.
I will give praise to the Lord who has been my guide; knowledge comes to me from my thoughts in the night.
I have put the Lord before me at all times; because he is at my right hand, I will not be moved.
Because of this my heart is glad, and my glory is full of joy: while my flesh takes its rest in hope.
For you will not let my soul be prisoned in the underworld; you will not let your loved one see the place of death.
You will make clear to me the way of life; where you are joy is complete; in your right hand there are pleasures for ever and ever.A Prayer. Of David.
Let my cause come to your ears, O Lord, give attention to my cry; give ear to my prayer which goes not out from false lips.
Be my judge; for your eyes see what is right.
You have put my heart to the test, searching me in the night; you have put me to the test and seen no evil purpose in me; I will keep my mouth from sin.
As for the works of men, by the word of your lips I have kept myself from the ways of the violent.
I have kept my feet in your ways, my steps have not been turned away.
My cry has gone up to you, for you will give me an answer, O God: let your ear be turned to me, and give attention to my words.
Make clear the wonder of your mercy, O saviour of those who put their faith in your right hand, from those who come out against them.
Keep me as the light of your eyes, covering me with the shade of your wings,
From the evil-doers who are violent to me, and from those who are round me, desiring my death.
They are shut up in their fat: with their mouths they say words of pride.
They have made a circle round our steps: their eyes are fixed on us, forcing us down to the earth;
Like a lion desiring its food, and like a young lion waiting in secret places.
Up! Lord, come out against him, make him low, with your sword be my saviour from the evil-doer.
With your hand, O Lord, from men, even men of the world, whose heritage is in this life, and whom you make full with your secret wealth: they are full of children; after their death their offspring take the rest of their goods.
As for me, I will see your face in righteousness: when I am awake it will be joy enough for me to see your form.To the chief music-maker. Of the servant of the Lord, of David, who said the words of this song to the Lord on the day when the Lord made him free from the hand of all his haters, and from the hand of Saul; and he said,
I will give you my love, O Lord, my strength.
The Lord is my Rock, my walled town, and my saviour; my God, my Rock, in him will I put my faith; my breastplate, and the horn of my salvation, and my high tower.
I will send up my cry to the Lord, who is to be praised; so will I be made safe from those who are against me.
The cords of death were round me, and the seas of evil put me in fear.
The cords of hell were round me: the nets of death came on me.
In my trouble my voice went up to the Lord, and my cry to my God: my voice came to his hearing in his holy Temple, and my prayer came before him, even into his ears.
Then trouble and shock came on the earth; and the bases of the mountains were moved and shaking, because he was angry.
There went up a smoke from his nose, and a fire of destruction from his mouth: flames were lighted by it.
The heavens were bent, so that he might come down; and it was dark under his feet.
And he went in flight through the air, seated on a storm-cloud: going quickly on the wings of the wind.
He made the dark his secret place; his tent round him was the dark waters and thick clouds of the skies.
Before his shining light his dark clouds went past, raining ice and fire.
The Lord made thunder in the heavens, and the voice of the Highest was sounding out: a rain of ice and fire.
He sent out his arrows, driving them in all directions; by his flames of fire they were troubled.
Then the deep beds of the waters were seen, and the bases of the world were uncovered, because of your words of wrath, O Lord, because of the breath from your mouth.
He sent from on high, he took me, pulling me out of great waters.
He made me free from my strong hater, and from those who were against me, because they were stronger than I.
They came on me in the day of my trouble; but the Lord was my support.
He took me out into a wide place; he was my saviour because he had delight in me.
The Lord gives me the reward of my righteousness, because my hands are clean before him.
For I have kept the ways of the Lord; I have not been turned away in sin from my God.
For all his decisions were before me, and I did not put away his laws from me.
And I was upright before him, and I kept myself from sin.
Because of this the Lord has given me the reward of my righteousness, because my hands are clean in his eyes.
On him who has mercy you will have mercy; to the upright you will be upright;
He who is holy will see that you are holy; but to the man whose way is not straight you will be a hard judge.
For you are the saviour of those who are in trouble; but eyes full of pride will be made low.
You, O Lord, will be my light; by you, my God, the dark will be made bright for me.
By your help I have made a way through the wall which was shutting me in; by the help of my God I have gone over a wall.
AsforGod, hiswayiscompletelygood; thewordoftheLordistested; heisabreastplate for all those who put their faith in him.
For who is God but the Lord? or who is a Rock but our God?
God puts a strong band about me, guiding me in a straight way.
He makes my feet like roes' feet, and puts me on high places.
He makes my hands expert in war, so that a bow of brass is bent by my arms.
You have given me the breastplate of your salvation: your right hand has been my support, and your mercy has made me great.
You have made my steps wide under me, so that my feet are kept from slipping.
I go after my haters and overtake them; not turning back till they are all overcome.
I will give them wounds, so that they are not able to get up: they are stretched under my feet.
For I have been armed by you with strength for the fight: you have made low under me those who come out against me.
By you their backs are turned in flight, so that my haters are cut off.
They were crying out, but there was no one to come to their help: even to the Lord, but he gave them no answer.
Then they were crushed as small as dust before the wind; they were drained out like the waste of the streets.
You have made me free from the fightings of the people; you have made me the head of the nations: a people of whom I had no knowledge will be my servants.
From the time when my name comes to their ears they will be ruled by me: men of other countries will, with false hearts, put themselves under my authority.
They will be wasting away, they will come out of their secret places shaking with fear.
The Lord is living; praise be to my Rock, and let the God of my salvation be honoured.
It is God who sends punishment on my haters, and puts peoples under my rule.
He makes me free from my haters; I am lifted up over those who come up against me: you have made me free from the violent man.
Because of this I will give you praise, O Lord, among the nations, and will make a song of praise to your name.
Great salvation does he give to his king; he has mercy on the king of his selection, David, and on his seed for ever.To the chief music-maker. A Psalm. Of David.
The heavens are sounding the glory of God; the arch of the sky makes clear the work of his hands.
Day after day it sends out its word, and night after night it gives knowledge.
There are no words or language; their voice makes no sound.
Their line has gone out through all the earth, and their words to the end of the world. In them has he put a tent for the sun,
Who is like a newly married man coming from his bride-tent, and is glad like a strong runner starting on his way.
His going out is from the end of the heaven, and his circle to the ends of it; there is nothing which is not open to his heat.
The law of the Lord is good, giving new life to the soul: the witness of the Lord is certain, giving wisdom to the foolish.
The orders of the Lord are right, making glad the heart: the rule of the Lord is holy, giving light to the eyes.
The fear of the Lord is clean, and has no end; the decisions of the Lord are true and full of righteousness.
More to be desired are they than gold, even than much shining gold; sweeter than the dropping honey.
By them is your servant made conscious of danger, and in keeping them there is great reward.
Who has full knowledge of his errors? make me clean from secret evil.
Keep your servant back from sins of pride; let them not have rule over me: then will I be upright and free from great sin.
Let the words of my mouth and the thoughts of my heart be pleasing in your eyes, O Lord, my strength and my salvation.To the chief music-maker. A Psalm. Of David.
May the Lord give ear to you in the day of trouble; may you be placed on high by the name of the God of Jacob;
May he send you help from the holy place, and give you strength from Zion;
May he keep all your offerings in mind, and be pleased with the fat of your burned offerings; (Selah.)
May he give you your heart's desire, and put all your purposes into effect.
We will be glad in your salvation, and in the name of our God we will put up our flags: may the Lord give you all your requests.
Now am I certain that the Lord gives salvation to his king; he will give him an answer from his holy heaven with the strength of salvation in his right hand.
Some put their faith in carriages and some in horses; but we will be strong in the name of the Lord our God.
They are bent down and made low; but we have been lifted up.
Come to our help, Lord: let the king give ear to our cry.To the chief music-maker. A Psalm. Of David.
The king will be glad in your strength, O Lord; how great will be his delight in your salvation!
You have given him his heart's desire, and have not kept back the request of his lips. (Selah.)
For you go before him with the blessings of good things: you put a crown of fair gold on his head.
He made request to you for life, and you gave it to him, long life for ever and ever.
His glory is great in your salvation: honour and authority have you put on him.
For you have made him a blessing for ever: you have given him joy in the light of your face.
For the king has faith in the Lord, and through the mercy of the Most High he will not be moved.
Your hand will make a search for all your haters; your right hand will be hard on all those who are against you.
You will make them like a flaming oven before you; the Lord in his wrath will put an end to them, and they will be burned up in the fire.
Their fruit will be cut off from the earth, and their seed from among the children of men.
For their thoughts were bitter against you: they had an evil design in their minds, which they were not able to put into effect.
Their backs will be turned when you make ready the cords of your bow against their faces.
Be lifted up, O Lord, in your strength; so will we make songs in praise of your power.To the chief music-maker on Aijeleth-hash-shahar. A Psalm. Of David.
My God, my God, why are you turned away from me? why are you so far from helping me, and from the words of my crying?
O my God, I make my cry in the day, and you give no answer; and in the night, and have no rest.
But you are holy, O you who are seated among the praises of Israel.
Our fathers had faith in you: they had faith and you were their saviour.
They sent up their cry to you and were made free: they put their faith in you and were not put to shame.
But I am a worm and not a man; cursed by men, and looked down on by the people.
I am laughed at by all those who see me: pushing out their lips and shaking their heads they say,
He put his faith in the Lord; let the Lord be his saviour now: let the Lord be his saviour, because he had delight in him.
But it was you who took care of me from the day of my birth: you gave me faith even from my mother's breasts.
I was in your hands even before my birth; you are my God from the time when I was in my mother's body.
Be not far from me, for trouble is near; there is no one to give help.
A great herd of oxen is round me: I am shut in by the strong oxen of Bashan.
I saw their mouths wide open, like lions crying after food.
I am flowing away like water, and all my bones are out of place: my heart is like wax, it has become soft in my body.
My throat is dry like a broken vessel; my tongue is fixed to the roof of my mouth, and the dust of death is on my lips.
Dogs have come round me: I am shut in by the band of evil-doers; they made wounds in my hands and feet.
I am able to see all my bones; their looks are fixed on me:
They make a division of my robes among them, by the decision of chance they take my clothing.
Do not be far from me, O Lord: O my strength, come quickly to my help.
Make my soul safe from the sword, my life from the power of the dog.
Be my saviour from the lion's mouth; let me go free from the horns of the cruel oxen.
I will give the knowledge of your name to my brothers: I will give you praise among the people.
You who have fear of the Lord, give him praise; all you seed of Jacob, give him glory; go in fear of him, all you seed of Israel.
For he has not been unmoved by the pain of him who is troubled; or kept his face covered from him; but he has given an answer to his cry.
My praise will be of you in the great meeting: I will make my offerings before his worshippers.
The poor will have a feast of good things: those who make search for the Lord will give him praise: your heart will have life for ever.
All the ends of the earth will keep it in mind and be turned to the Lord: all the families of the nations will give him worship.
For the kingdom is the Lord's; he is the ruler among the nations.
All the fat ones of the earth will give him worship; all those who go down to the dust will make themselves low before him, even he who has not enough for the life of his soul.
A seed will be his servant; the doings of the Lord will be made clear to the generation which comes after.
They will come and make his righteousness clear to a people of the future because he has done this.A Psalm. Of David.
The Lord takes care of me as his sheep; I will not be without any good thing.
He makes a resting-place for me in the green fields: he is my guide by the quiet waters.
He gives new life to my soul: he is my guide in the ways of righteousness because of his name.
Yes, though I go through the valley of deep shade, I will have no fear of evil; for you are with me, your rod and your support are my comfort.
You make ready a table for me in front of my haters: you put oil on my head; my cup is overflowing.
Truly, blessing and mercy will be with me all the days of my life; and I will have a place in the house of the Lord all my days.A Psalm. Of David.
The earth is the Lord's, with all its wealth; the world and all the people living in it.
For by him it was based on the seas, and made strong on the deep rivers.
Who may go up into the hill of the Lord? and who may come into his holy place?
He who has clean hands and a true heart; whose desire has not gone out to foolish things, who has not taken a false oath.
He will have blessing from the Lord, and righteousness from the God of his salvation.
This is the generation of those whose hearts are turned to you, even to your face, O God of Jacob. (Selah.)
Let your heads be lifted up, O doors; be lifted up, O you eternal doors: that the King of glory may come in.
Who is the King of glory? The Lord of strength and power, the Lord strong in war.
Let your heads be lifted up, O doors; let them be lifted up, O you eternal doors: that the King of glory may come in.
Who is the King of glory? The Lord of armies, he is the King of glory. (Selah.)Of David.
To you, O Lord, my soul is lifted up.
OmyGod, Ihaveputmyfaithinyou, letmenotbeshamed; letnotmyhatersbeglorying over me.
Let no servant of yours be put to shame; may those be shamed who are false without cause.
Make your steps clear to me, O Lord; give me knowledge of your ways.
Be my guide and teacher in the true way; for you are the God of my salvation; I am waiting for your word all the day.
O Lord, keep in mind your pity and your mercies; for they have been from the earliest times.
Do not keep in mind my sins when I was young, or my wrongdoing: let your memory of me be full of mercy, O Lord, because of your righteousness.
Good and upright is the Lord: so he will be the teacher of sinners in the way.
He will be an upright guide to the poor in spirit: he will make his way clear to them.
All the ways of the Lord are mercy and good faith for those who keep his agreement and his witness.
Because of your name, O Lord, let me have forgiveness for my sin, which is very great.
If a man has the fear of the Lord, the Lord will be his teacher in the way of his pleasure.
His soul will be full of good things, and his seed will have the earth for its heritage.
The secret of the Lord is with those in whose hearts is the fear of him; he will make his agreement clear to them.
My eyes are turned to the Lord at all times; for he will take my feet out of the net.
Be turned to me, and have mercy on me; for I am troubled and have no helper.
The troubles of my heart are increased: O take me out of my sorrows.
Give thought to my grief and my pain; and take away all my sins.
See how those who are against me are increased, for bitter is their hate of me.
O keep my soul, and take me out of danger: let me not be shamed, for I have put my faith in you.
For my clean and upright ways keep me safe, because my hope is in you.
Give Israel salvation, O God, out of all his troubles.Of David.
O Lord, be my judge, for my behaviour has been upright: I have put my faith in the Lord, I am not in danger of slipping.
Put me in the scales, O Lord, so that I may be tested; let the fire make clean my thoughts and my heart.
For your mercy is before my eyes; and I have gone in the way of your good faith.
I have not taken my seat with foolish persons, and I do not go with false men.
I have been a hater of the band of wrongdoers, and I will not be seated among sinners.
I will make my hands clean from sin; so will I go round your altar, O Lord;
That I may give out the voice of praise, and make public all the wonders which you have done.
Lord, your house has been dear to me, and the resting-place of your glory.
Let not my soul be numbered among sinners, or my life among men of blood;
In whose hands are evil designs, and whose right hands take money for judging falsely.
But as for me, I will go on in my upright ways: be my saviour, and have mercy on me.
I have a safe resting-place for my feet; I will give praise to the Lord in the meetings of the people.Of David.
The Lord is my light and my salvation; who is then a cause of fear to me? the Lord is the strength of my life; who is a danger to me?
When evil-doers, even my haters, came on me to put an end to me, they were broken and put to shame.
Even if an army came against me with its tents, my heart would have no fear: if war was made on me, my faith would not be moved.
One prayer have I made to the Lord, and this is my heart's desire; that I may have a place in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, looking on his glory, and getting wisdom in his Temple.
For in the time of trouble he will keep me safe in his tent: in the secret place of his tent he will keep me from men's eyes; high on a rock he will put me.
And now my head will be lifted up higher than my haters who are round me: because of this I will make offerings of joy in his tent; I will make a song, truly I will make a song of praise to the Lord.
O Lord, let the voice of my cry come to your ears: have mercy on me, and give me an answer.
When you said, Make search for my face, my heart said to you, For your face will I make my search.
Let not your face be covered from me; do not put away your servant in wrath; you have been my help: do not give me up or take your support from me, O God of my salvation.
When my father and my mother are turned away from me, then the Lord will be my support.
Make your way clear to me, O Lord, guiding me by the right way, because of my haters.
Do not give me into their hands, because false witnesses have come out against me, and men breathing destruction.
I had almost given up my hope of seeing the blessing of the Lord in the land of the living.
Let your hope be in the Lord: take heart and be strong; yes, let your hope be in the Lord.Of David.
My cry goes up to you, O Lord, my Rock; do not keep back your answer from me, so that I may not become like those who go down into the underworld.
Give ear to the voice of my prayer, when I am crying to you, when my hands are lifted up to your holy place.
Do not take me away with the sinners and the workers of evil, who say words of peace to their neighbours, but evil is in their hearts.
Give them the right reward of their acts, and of their evil doings: give them punishment for the works of their hands, let them have their full reward.
Because they have no respect for the works of the Lord, or for the things which his hands have made, they will be broken down and not lifted up by him.
May the Lord be praised, because he has given ear to the voice of my prayer.
The Lord is my strength and my breastplate, my heart had faith in him and I am helped; for this cause my heart is full of rapture, and I will give him praise in my song.
The Lord is their strength, and a strong place of salvation for his king.
Be a saviour to your people, and send a blessing on your heritage: be their guide, and let them be lifted up for ever.A Psalm. Of David.
Give to the Lord, you sons of the gods, give to the Lord glory and strength.
Give to the Lord the full glory of his name; give him worship in holy robes.
The voice of the Lord is on the waters: the God of glory is thundering, the Lord is on the great waters.
The voice of the Lord is full of power; the voice of the Lord has a noble sound.
By the voice of the Lord are the cedar-trees broken, even the cedars of Lebanon are broken by the Lord.
He makes them go jumping about like a young ox; Lebanon and Sirion like a young mountain ox.
At the voice of the Lord flames of fire are seen.
At the voice of the Lord there is a shaking in the waste land, even a shaking in the waste land of Kadesh.
At the voice of the Lord the roes give birth, the leaves are taken from the trees: in his Temple everything says, Glory.
The Lord had his seat as king when the waters came on the earth; the Lord is seated as king for ever.
The Lord will give strength to his people; the Lord will give his people the blessing of peace.A Psalm. A Song at the blessing of the House. Of David.
I will give you praise and honour, O Lord, because through you I have been lifted up; you have not given my haters cause to be glad over me.
O Lord my God, I sent up my cry to you, and you have made me well.
O Lord, you have made my soul come again from the underworld: you have given me life and kept me from going down among the dead.
Make songs to the Lord, O you saints of his, and give praise to his holy name.
For his wrath is only for a minute; in his grace there is life; weeping may be for a night, but joy comes in the morning.
When things went well for me I said, I will never be moved.
Lord, by your grace you have kept my mountain strong: when your face was turned from me I was troubled.
My voice went up to you, O Lord; I made my prayer to the Lord.
What profit is there in my blood if I go down into the underworld? will the dust give you praise, or be a witness to your help?
Give ear to me, O Lord, and have mercy on me: Lord, be my helper.
By you my sorrow is turned into dancing; you have taken away my clothing of grief, and given me robes of joy;
So that my glory may make songs of praise to you and not be quiet. O Lord my God, I will give you praise for ever.To the chief music-maker. A Psalm. Of David.
In you, O Lord, have I put my hope; let me never be shamed; keep me safe in your righteousness.
Let your ear be turned to me; take me quickly out of danger; be my strong Rock, my place of strength where I may be safe.
For you are my Rock and my strong tower; go in front of me and be my guide, because of your name.
Take me out of the net which they have put ready for me secretly; for you are my strength.
Into your hands I give my spirit; you are my saviour, O Lord God for ever true.
I am full of hate for those who go after false gods; but my hope is in the Lord.
I will be glad and have delight in your mercy; because you have seen my trouble; you have had pity on my soul in its sorrows;
And you have not given me into the hand of my hater; you have put my feet in a wide place.
Have mercy on me, O Lord, for I am in trouble; my eyes are wasted with grief, I am wasted in soul and body.
Mylifegoesoninsorrow, andmyyearsinweeping; mystrengthisalmostgonebecause of my sin, and my bones are wasted away.
Because of all those who are against me, I have become a word of shame to my neighbours; a cause of shaking the head and a fear to my friends: those who saw me in the street went in flight from me.
I have gone from men's minds and memory like a dead man; I am like a broken vessel.
False statements against me have come to my ears; fear was on every side: they were talking together against me, designing to take away my life.
But I had faith in you, O Lord; I said, You are my God.
The chances of my life are in your hand; take me out of the hands of my haters, and of those who go after me.
Let your servant see the light of your face; in your mercy be my saviour.
Let me not be shamed, O Lord, for I have made my prayer to you; let the sinners be shamed, and let their mouths be shut in the underworld.
Let the false lips be shut, which say evil against the upright, looking down on him in their pride.
O how great is your grace, which you have put in store for your worshippers, and which you have made clear to those who had faith in you, before the sons of men!
You will keep them safe in your house from the designs of man; in the secret of your tent will you keep them from angry tongues.
May the Lord be praised, because he has made clear to me the wonder of his grace in a strong town.
And as for me, I said in my fear, I am cut off from before your eyes; but you gave ear to the voice of my prayer, when my cry went up to you.
O have love for the Lord, all you his saints; for the Lord keeps safe from danger all those who are true to him, and gives the workers of pride their right reward.
Put away fear and let your heart be strong, all you whose hope is in the Lord.Of David. Maschil.
Happy is he who has forgiveness for his wrongdoing, and whose sin is covered.
Happy is the man in whom the Lord sees no evil, and in whose spirit there is no deceit.
When I kept my mouth shut, my bones were wasted, because of my crying all through the day.
For the weight of your hand was on me day and night; my body became dry like the earth in summer. (Selah.)
I made my wrongdoing clear to you, and did not keep back my sin. I said, I will put it all before the Lord; and you took away my wrongdoing and my sin. (Selah.)
For this cause let every saint make his prayer to you at a time when you are near: then the overflowing of the great waters will not overtake him.
You are my safe and secret place; you will keep me from trouble; you will put songs of salvation on the lips of those who are round me. (Selah.)
I will give you knowledge, teaching you the way to go; my eye will be your guide.
Do not be like the horse or the ass, without sense; ...
The sinner will be full of trouble; but mercy will be round the man who has faith in the Lord.
Be glad in the Lord with joy, you upright men; give cries of joy, all you whose hearts are true.Be glad in the Lord, O doers of righteousness; for praise is beautiful for the upright.
Give praise to the Lord on the corded instrument; make melody to him with instruments of music.
Make a new song to him; playing expertly with a loud noise.
For the word of the Lord is upright, and all his works are certain.
His delight is in righteousness and wisdom; the earth is full of the mercy of the Lord.
By the word of the Lord were the heavens made; and all the army of heaven by the breath of his mouth.
He makes the waters of the sea come together in a mass; he keeps the deep seas in store-houses.
Let the earth be full of the fear of the Lord; let all the people of the world be in holy fear of him.
For he gave the word, and it was done; by his order it was fixed for ever.
The Lord undoes the designs of the nations; he makes the thoughts of the peoples without effect.
TheLord'spurposeiseternal, thedesignsofhisheartgoonthroughallthegenerations of man.
Happy is the nation whose God is the Lord; and the people whom he has taken for his heritage.
The Lord is looking down from heaven; he sees all the sons of men;
From his house he keeps watch on all who are living on the earth;
He makes all their hearts; their works are clear to him.
A king's salvation is not in the power of his army; a strong man does not get free by his great strength.
A horse is a false hope; his great power will not make any man free from danger.
See, the eye of the Lord is on those in whose hearts is the fear of him, on those whose hope is in his mercy;
To keep their souls from death; and to keep them living in time of need.
Our souls are waiting for the Lord; he is our help and our salvation.
For in him our hearts have joy; in his holy name is our hope.
Let your mercy be on us, O Lord, as we are waiting for you.Of David. When he made a change in his behaviour before Abimelech, who sent him away, and he went.
I will be blessing the Lord at all times; his praise will be ever in my mouth.
My soul will say great things of the Lord: the poor in spirit will have knowledge of it and be glad.
O give praise to the Lord with me; let us be witnesses together of his great name.
I was searching for the Lord, and he gave ear to my voice, and made me free from all my fears.
Let your eyes be turned to him and you will have light, and your faces will not be shamed.
This poor man's cry came before the Lord, and he gave him salvation from all his troubles.
The angel of the Lord is ever watching over those who have fear of him, to keep them safe.
By experience you will see that the Lord is good; happy is the man who has faith in him.
Keep yourselves in the fear of the Lord, all you his saints; for those who do so will have no need of anything.
The young lions are in need and have no food; but those who are looking to the Lord will have every good thing.
Come, children, give attention to me; I will be your teacher in the fear of the Lord.
What man has a love of life, and a desire that his days may be increased so that he may see good?
Keep your tongue from evil, and your lips from words of deceit.
Be turned from evil, and do good; make a search for peace, desiring it with all your heart.
The eyes of the Lord are on the upright, and his ears are open to their cry.
The face of the Lord is against those who do evil, to take away the memory of them from the earth.
The cry of the upright comes before the Lord, and he takes them out of all their troubles.
The Lord is near the broken-hearted; he is the saviour of those whose spirits are crushed down.
Great are the troubles of the upright: but the Lord takes him safely out of them all.
He keeps all his bones: not one of them is broken.
Evil will put an end to the sinner, and those who are haters of righteousness will come to destruction.
The Lord will be the saviour of the souls of his servants, and no one who has faith in him will be put to shame.Of David.
O Lord, be on my side against those who are judging me; be at war with those who make war against me.
Be a breastplate to me, and give me your help.
Take up your spear and keep back my attackers; say to my soul, I am your salvation.
Let them be overcome and put to shame who make attempts to take my soul; let those who would do me damage be turned back and made foolish.
Let them be like dust from the grain before the wind; let the angel of the Lord send them in flight.
Let their way be dark and full of danger; let them be troubled by the angel of the Lord.
For without cause they have put a net ready for me secretly, in which to take my soul.
Let destruction come on them without their knowledge; let them be taken themselves in their secret nets, falling into the same destruction.
And my soul will have joy in the Lord; it will be glad in his salvation.
All my bones will say, Lord, who is like you? The saviour of the poor man from the hands of the strong, of him who is poor and in need from him who takes his goods.
False witnesses got up: they put questions to me about crimes of which I had no knowledge.
They gave me back evil for good, troubling my soul.
But as for me, when they were ill I put on the clothing of sorrow: I went without food and was sad, and my prayer came back again to my heart.
My behaviour was as if it had been my friend or my brother: I was bent low in grief like one whose mother is dead.
But they took pleasure in my trouble, and came together, yes, low persons came together against me without my knowledge; they never came to an end of wounding me.
Like men of deceit they put me to shame; the voice of their wrath was loud against me.
Lord, how long will you be looking on? take my soul from their destruction, my life from the lions.
I will give you praise in the great meeting; I will give you honour among a strong people.
Do not let my haters be glad over me falsely; let not those who are against me without cause make sport of me.
Fortheydonotsaywordsofpeace; intheirdeceittheyaredesigningevilthingsagainst the quiet ones in the land.
Their mouths were open wide against me, and they said, Aha, aha, our eyes have seen it.
You have seen this, O Lord; be not unmoved: O Lord, be not far from me.
Be awake, O Lord, be moved to take up my cause, my God and my Lord.
Be my judge, O Lord my God, in your righteousness; do not let them be glad over me.
Let them not say in their hearts, So we will have it: let them not say, We have put an end to him.
Let all those who take pleasure in my troubles be shamed and come to nothing: let those who are lifted up against me be covered with shame and have no honour.
Let those who are on my side give cries of joy; let them ever say, The Lord be praised, for he has pleasure in the peace of his servant.
And my tongue will be talking of your righteousness and of your praise all the day.To the chief music-maker. Of the servant of the Lord. Of David.
The sin of the evil-doer says in his heart, There is no fear of the Lord before his eyes.
For he takes comfort in the thought that his sin will not be uncovered and hated.
In the words of his mouth are evil and deceit; he has given up being wise and doing good.
He gives thought to evil on his bed; he takes a way which is not good; he is not a hater of evil.
Your mercy, O Lord, is in the heavens, and your strong purpose is as high as the clouds.
Your righteousness is like the mountains of God; your judging is like the great deep; O Lord, you give life to man and beast.
How good is your loving mercy, O God! the children of men take cover under the shade of your wings.
The delights of your house will be showered on them; you will give them drink from the river of your pleasures.
For with you is the fountain of life: in your light we will see light.
O let there be no end to your loving mercy to those who have knowledge of you, or of your righteousness to the upright in heart.
Let not the foot of pride come against me, or the hand of the evil-doers put me out of my place.
There the workers of evil have come down: they have been made low, and will not be lifted up.Of David.
Do not be angry because of the wrongdoers, or have envy of the workers of evil.
For they will quickly be cut down like grass, and become dry like the green plants.
Have faith in the Lord, and do good; be at rest in the land, and go after righteousness.
So will your delight be in the Lord, and he will give you your heart's desires.
Put your life in the hands of the Lord; have faith in him and he will do it.
And he will make your righteousness be seen like the light, and your cause like the shining of the sun.
Take your rest in the Lord, waiting quietly for him; do not be angry because of the man who does well in his evil ways, and gives effect to his bad designs.
Put an end to your wrath and be no longer bitter; do not give way to angry feeling which is a cause of sin.
For the evil-doers will be cut off: but those who have faith in the Lord will have the earth for their heritage.
For in a short time the evil-doer will be gone: you will go searching for his place, and it will not be there.
But the gentle will have the earth for their heritage; they will take their delight in peace without measure.
The sinner has evil designs against the upright, lifting up the voice of wrath against him.
He will be laughed at by the Lord, who sees that his day is coming.
The evil-doers have taken out their swords, their bows are bent; for crushing the poor, and to put to death those who are upright in their ways.
But their swords will be turned into their hearts, and their bows will be broken.
The little which the good man has is better than the wealth of evil-doers.
For the arms of the evil-doers will be broken: but the Lord is the support of the good.
The days of the upright are numbered by the Lord, and their heritage will be for ever.
They will not be shamed in the evil time, and in the days when all are in need of food they will have enough.
But the wrongdoers will come to destruction, and the haters of the Lord will be like the fat of lambs, they will be burned up; they will go up in smoke, and never again be seen.
The sinner takes money and does not give it back; but the upright man has mercy, and gives to others.
Those who have his blessing will have the earth for their heritage; but those who are cursed by him will be cut off.
The steps of a good man are ordered by the Lord, and he takes delight in his way.
Even if he has a fall he will not be without help: for the hand of the Lord is supporting him.
I have been young, and now am old, but I have not seen the good man without help, or his children looking for bread.
All the day he is ready to have mercy and to give; his children are a blessing.
Be turned from evil, and do good; and your place will be for ever.
For the Lord is a lover of righteousness, and takes care of his saints; they will be kept safe for ever; but the seed of the evil-doers will be cut off.
The upright will have the earth for their heritage, and will go on living there for ever.
The mouth of the good man says words of wisdom; the talk of his tongue is of righteousness.
The law of his God is in his heart; he will never make a false step.
The sinners are watching the upright man, desiring to put him to death.
The Lord will not give him into their hands, or be against him when he is judged.
Be waiting for the Lord, and keep his way; and you will be lifted up, and have the land for your heritage: when the evil-doers are cut off, you will see it.
I have seen the evil-doer in great power, covering the earth like a great tree.
But he came to an end, and there was no sign of him; I made a search for him and he was not there.
Give attention to the good man, and take note of the upright; because the end of that man is peace.
But as for the sinners, they will be cut off together; the end of the wrongdoers is destruction.
But the Lord is the saviour of the upright: he is their strength in the time of trouble.
And the Lord will be their help, and keep them safe: he will take them out of the hands of the evil-doers, and be their saviour, because they had faith in him.A Psalm. Of David. To keep in memory.
O Lord, be not bitter with me in your wrath; let not your hand be on me in the heat of your passion.
For your arrows have gone into my flesh, and I am crushed under the weight of your hand.
My flesh is wasted because of your wrath; and there is no peace in my bones because of my sin.
For my crimes have gone over my head; they are like a great weight which is more than my strength.
My wounds are poisoned and evil-smelling, because of my foolish behaviour.
I am troubled, I am made low; I go weeping all the day.
For my body is full of burning; all my flesh is unhealthy.
I am feeble and crushed down; I gave a cry like a lion because of the grief in my heart.
Lord, all my desire is before you; my sorrow is not kept secret from you.
My heart goes out in pain, my strength is wasting away; as for the light of my eyes, it is gone from me.
My lovers and my friends keep away from my disease; my relations keep far away.
Those who have a desire to take my life put nets for me; those who are designing my destruction say evil things against me, all the day their minds are full of deceit.
But I kept my ears shut like a man without hearing; like a man without a voice, never opening his mouth.
So I was like a man whose ears are shut, and in whose mouth there are no sharp words.
In you, O Lord, is my hope: you will give me an answer, O Lord, my God.
I said, Let them not be glad over me; when my foot is moved, let them not be lifted up with pride against me.
My feet are near to falling, and my sorrow is ever before me.
I will make clear my wrongdoing, with sorrow in my heart for my sin.
But they are strong who have hate for me without cause: those who are against me falsely are increased in numbers.
They give me back evil for good; they are my haters because I go after the thing which is right.
Do not give me up, O Lord; O my God, be near to me.
Come quickly to give me help, O Lord, my salvation.To the chief music-maker. Of Jeduthun. A Psalm. Of David.
I said, I will give attention to my ways, so that my tongue may do no wrong; I will keep my mouth under control, while the sinner is before me.
I made no sound, I said no word, even of good; and I was moved with sorrow.
My heart was burning in my breast; while I was deep in thought the fire was lighted; then I said with my tongue,
Lord, give me knowledge of my end, and of the measure of my days, so that I may see how feeble I am.
You have made my days no longer than a hand's measure; and my years are nothing in your eyes; truly, every man is but a breath. (Selah.)
Truly, every man goes on his way like an image; he is troubled for no purpose: he makes a great store of wealth, and has no knowledge of who will get it.
And now, Lord, what am I waiting for? my hope is in you.
Make me free from all my sins; do not let me be shamed by the man of evil behaviour.
I was quiet, and kept my mouth shut; because you had done it.
No longer let your hand be hard on me; I am wasted by the blows of your hand.
By the weight of your wrath against man's sin, the glory of his form is wasted away; truly every man is but a breath. (Selah.)
Let my prayer come to your ears, O Lord, and give attention to my cry, make an answer to my weeping: for my time here is short before you, and in a little time I will be gone, like all my fathers.
Let your wrath be turned away from me, so that I may be comforted, before I go away from here, and become nothing.To the chief music-maker. Of David. A Psalm.
When I was waiting quietly for the Lord, his heart was turned to me, and he gave ear to my cry.
He took me up out of a deep waste place, out of the soft and sticky earth; he put my feet on a rock, and made my steps certain.
And he put a new song in my mouth, even praise to our God; numbers have seen it with fear, and put their faith in the Lord.
Happy is the man who has faith in the Lord, and does not give honour to the men of pride or to those who are turned away to deceit.
O Lord my God, great are the wonders which you have done in your thought for us; it is not possible to put them out in order before you; when I would give an account of them, their number is greater than I may say.
You had no desire for offerings of beasts or fruits of the earth; ears you made for me: for burned offerings and sin offerings you made no request.
Then I said, See, I come; it is recorded of me in the roll of the book,
My delight is to do your pleasure, O my God; truly, your law is in my heart.
I have given news of righteousness in the great meeting; O Lord, you have knowledge that I have not kept back my words.
Your righteousness has not been folded away in my heart; I have made clear your true word and your salvation; I have not kept secret your mercy or your faith from the great meeting.
Take not away your gentle mercies from me, O Lord; let your mercy and your faith keep me safe for ever.
For unnumbered evils are round about me; my sins have overtaken me, so that I am bent down with their weight; they are more than the hairs of my head, my strength is gone because of them.
Be pleased, O Lord, to take me out of danger; O Lord, come quickly and give me help.
Let those who go after my soul for its destruction have shame and trouble together; let them be turned back and made foolish who take pleasure in my trouble.
Let those who say to me, Aha, aha! be surprised because of their shame.
Let all those who are looking for you be glad and have joy in you; let the lovers of your salvation ever say, May the Lord be great.
Though I am poor and in need, the Lord has me in mind; you are my help and my saviour; let there be no waiting, O my God.To the chief music-maker. A Psalm. Of David.
Happy is the man who gives thought to the poor; the Lord will be his saviour in the time of trouble.
The Lord will keep him safe, and give him life; the Lord will let him be a blessing on the earth, and will not give him into the hand of his haters.
The Lord will be his support on his bed of pain: by you will all his grief be turned to strength.
I said, Lord, have mercy on me; make my soul well, because my faith is in you.
My haters say evil against me, When will he be dead, and his name come to an end?
If one comes to see me, deceit is in his heart; he keeps a store of evil, which he makes public in every place.
All my haters are talking secretly together against me; they are designing my downfall.
They say, He has an evil disease, which will not let him go: and now that he is down he will not get up again.
Even my dearest friend, in whom I had faith, who took bread with me, is turned against me.
But you, O Lord, have mercy on me, lifting me up, so that I may give them their punishment.
By this I see that you have pleasure in me, because my hater does not overcome me.
And as for me, you are my support in my righteousness, giving me a place before your face for ever.
May the Lord God of Israel be praised, through eternal days and for ever. So be it. So be it.To the chief music-maker. Maschil. Of the sons of Korah.
Like the desire of the roe for the water-streams, so is my soul's desire for you, O God.
My soul is dry for need of God, the living God; when may I come and see the face of God?
My tears have been my food day and night, while they keep saying to me, Where is your God?
Let my soul be overflowing with grief when these things come back to my mind, how I went in company to the house of God, with the voice of joy and praise, with the song of those who were keeping the feast.
Why are you crushed down, O my soul? and why are you troubled in me? put your hope in God; for I will again give him praise who is my help and my God.
My soul is crushed down in me, so I will keep you in mind; from the land of Jordan and of the Hermons, from the hill Mizar.
Deepissoundingto deepatthenoiseofyourwaterfalls; allyourwaveshavegonerolling over me.
But the Lord will send his mercy in the daytime, and in the night his song will be with me, a prayer to the God of my life.
I will say to God my Rock, Why have you let me go from your memory? why do I go in sorrow because of the attacks of my haters?
The cruel words of my haters are like a crushing of my bones; when they say to me every day, Where is your God?
Why are you crushed down, O my soul? and why are you troubled in me? put your hope in God; for I will again give him praise who is my help and my God.Be my judge, O God, supporting my cause against a nation without religion; O keep me from the false and evil man.
You are the God of my strength; why have you put me from you? why do I go in sorrow because of the attacks of my haters?
O send out your light and your true word; let them be my guide: let them take me to your holy hill, and to your tents.
Then I will go up to the altar of God, to the God of my joy; I will be glad and give praise to you on an instrument of music, O God, my God.
Why are you crushed down, O my soul? and why are you troubled in me? put your hope in God, for I will again give him praise who is my help and my God.To the chief music-maker. Of the sons of Korah Maschil.
It has come to our ears, O God, our fathers have given us the story, of the works which you did in their days, in the old times,
Uprooting the nations with your hand, and planting our fathers in their place; cutting down the nations, but increasing the growth of your people.
For they did not make the land theirs by their swords, and it was not their arms which kept them safe; but your right hand, and your arm, and the light of your face, because you had pleasure in them.
You are my King and my God; ordering salvation for Jacob.
Through you will we overcome our haters; by your name will they be crushed under our feet who are violent against us.
I will not put faith in my bow, my sword will not be my salvation.
But it is you who have been our saviour from those who were against us, and have put to shame those who had hate for us.
Our pride is in God at all times, to his name we give praise for ever. (Selah.)
But now you have sent us away from you, and put us to shame; you do not go out with our armies.
Because of this we are turned back by the attacker: those who have hate for us take our goods for themselves.
You have made us like sheep which are taken for meat; we are put to flight among the nations.
You let your people go for nothing; your wealth is not increased by their price.
You have made us to be looked down on by our neighbours, we are laughed at and shamed by those who are round about us.
Our name is a word of shame among the nations, a sign for the shaking of heads among the peoples.
My downfall is ever before me, and I am covered with the shame of my face;
Because of the voice of him who says sharp and bitter words; because of the hater and him who is the instrument of punishment.
All this has come on us, but still we have kept you in our memory; and we have not been false to your word.
Our hearts have not gone back, and our steps have not been turned out of your way;
Though you have let us be crushed in the place of jackals, though we are covered with darkest shade.
If the name of our God has gone out of our minds, or if our hands have been stretched out to a strange god,
Will not God make search for it? for he sees the secrets of the heart.
Truly, because of you we are put to death every day; we are numbered like sheep for destruction.
Why are you sleeping, O Lord? awake! and come to our help, do not give us up for ever.
Why is your face covered, and why do you give no thought to our trouble and our cruel fate?
For our souls are crushed down to the dust: our bodies are stretched out on the earth.
Up! and come to our help, and give us salvation because of your mercy.To the chief music-maker; put to Shoshannim. Of the sons of Korah. Maschil. A Song of loves.
My heart is flowing over with good things; my words are of that which I have made for a king; my tongue is the pen of a ready writer.
You are fairer than the children of men; grace is flowing through your lips; for this cause the blessing of God is with you for ever.
Put on your sword, make it ready at your side, O strong chief, with your glory and power.
And go nobly on in your power, because you are good and true and without pride; and your right hand will be teaching you things of fear.
Your arrows are sharp in the heart of the king's haters; because of them the peoples are falling under you.
Your seat of power, O God, is for ever and ever; the rod of your kingdom is a rod of honour.
You have been a lover of righteousness and a hater of evil: and so God, your God, has put the oil of joy on your head, lifting you high over all other kings.
Your robes are full of the smell of all sorts of perfumes and spices; music from the king's ivory houses has made you glad.
Kings' daughters are among your noble women: on your right is the queen in gold of Ophir.
O daughter, give thought and attention, and let your ear be open; no longer keep in mind your people, and your father's house;
So will the king have a great desire for you, seeing how beautiful you are; because he is your lord, give him honour.
And the daughtersof Tyre will be there with an offering; those who have wealth among the people will be looking for your approval.
In the great house the king's daughter is all shining: her clothing is worked with gold.
She will come before the king in robes of needlework; the virgins in her train will come before you.
With joy and rapture will they come; they will go into the king's house.
Your children will take the place of your fathers; so that you may make them rulers over all the earth.
I will keep the memory of your name living through all generations; and because of this the people will give you praise for ever.To the chief music-maker. Of the sons of Korah; put to Alamoth. A Song.
God is our harbour and our strength, a very present help in trouble.
For this cause we will have no fear, even though the earth is changed, and though the mountains are moved in the heart of the sea;
Though its waters are sounding and troubled, and though the mountains are shaking with their violent motion. (Selah.)
There is a river whose streams make glad the resting-place of God, the holy place of the tents of the Most High.
God has taken his place in her; she will not be moved: he will come to her help at the dawn of morning.
The nations were angry, the kingdoms were moved; at the sound of his voice the earth became like wax.
The Lord of armies is with us; the God of Jacob is our high tower. (Selah.)
Come, see the works of the Lord, the destruction which he has made in the earth.
He puts an end to wars over all the earth; by him the bow is broken, and the spear cut in two, and the carriage burned in the fire.
Be at peace in the knowledge that I am God: I will be lifted up among the nations, I will be honoured through all the earth.
The Lord of armies is with us; the God of Jacob is our high tower. (Selah.)To the chief music-maker. A Psalm. Of the sons of Korah.
O make a glad noise with your hands, all you peoples; letting your voices go up to God with joy.
For the Lord Most High is to be feared; he is a great King over all the earth.
He will put down the peoples under us, and the nations under our feet.
He will give us our heritage, the glory of Jacob who is dear to him. (Selah.)
God has gone up with a glad cry, the Lord with the sound of the horn.
Give praises to God, make songs of praise; give praises to our King, make songs of praise.
For God is the King of all the earth; make songs of praise with knowledge.
God is the ruler over the nations; God is on the high seat of his holy rule.
The rulers of the peoples have come together, with the people of the God of Abraham; because the powers of the earth are God's: he is lifted up on high.A Song. A Psalm. Of the sons of Korah.
Great is the Lord and greatly to be praised, in the town of our God, in his holy mountain.
Beautiful in its high position, the joy of all the earth, is the mountain of Zion, the mountain of God, the town of the great King.
In its buildings God is seen to be a high tower.
For see! the kings came together by agreement, they were joined together.
They saw it, and so were full of wonder; they were troubled, and went quickly away in fear.
Shaking came on them and pain, as on a woman in childbirth.
By you the ships of Tarshish are broken as by an east wind.
As it came to our ears so have we seen it, in the town of the Lord of armies, in the town of our God; God will keep it fixed for ever. (Selah.)
Our thoughts were of your mercy, O God, while we were in your Temple.
As your name is, O God, so is your praise to the ends of the earth; your right hand is full of righteousness.
Let there be joy in the mountain of Zion, and let the daughters of Judah be glad, because of your wise decisions.
Make your way about Zion, and go round it, numbering its towers.
Take note of its strong walls, looking well at its fair buildings; so that you may give word of it to the generation which comes after.
Because this God is our God for ever and ever: he will be our guide.Alamoth. To the chief music-maker. Of the sons of Korah. A Psalm.
Give attention to this, all you peoples; let your ears be open, all you who are living in the world.
High and low together, the poor, and those who have wealth.
From my mouth will come words of wisdom; and in the thoughts of my heart will be knowledge.
I will put my teaching into a story; I will make my dark sayings clear with music.
What cause have I for fear in the days of evil, when the evil-doing of those who are working for my downfall is round about me?
Even of those whose faith is in their wealth, and whose hearts are lifted up because of their stores.
Truly, no man may get back his soul for a price, or give to God the payment for himself;
(Because it takes a great price to keep his soul from death, and man is not able to give it.)
So that he might have eternal life, and never see the underworld.
For he sees that wise men come to their end, and foolish persons of low behaviour come to destruction together, letting their wealth go to others.
The place of the dead is their house for ever, and their resting-place through all generations; those who come after them give their names to their lands.
But man, like the animals, does not go on for ever; he comes to an end like the beasts.
This is the way of the foolish; their silver is for those who come after them, and their children get the pleasure of their gold. (Selah.)
Death will give them their food like sheep; the underworld is their fate and they will go down into it; their flesh is food for worms; their form is wasted away; the underworld is their resting-place for ever.
But God will get back my soul; for he will take me from the power of death. (Selah.)
Have no fear when wealth comes to a man, and the glory of his house is increased;
For at his death, he will take nothing away; his glory will not go down after him.
Though he might have pride in his soul in his life-time, and men will give you praise if you do well for yourself,
He will go to the generation of his fathers; he will not see the light again.
Man, like the animals, does not go on for ever; he comes to an end like the beasts.A Psalm. Of Asaph.
The God of gods, even the Lord, has sent out his voice, and the earth is full of fear; from the coming up of the sun to its going down.
From Zion, most beautiful of places, God has sent out his light.
Our God will come, and will not keep quiet; with fire burning before him, and storm- winds round him.
His voice will go out to the heavens and to the earth, for the judging of his people:
Let my saints come together to me; those who have made an agreement with me by offerings.
And let the heavens make clear his righteousness; for God himself is the judge. (Selah.)
Give ear, O my people, to my words; O Israel, I will be a witness against you; I am God, even your God.
I will not take up a cause against you because of your offerings, or because of your burned offerings, which are ever before me.
I will take no ox out of your house, or he-goats from your flocks;
For every beast of the woodland is mine, and the cattle on a thousand hills.
I see all the birds of the mountains, and the beasts of the field are mine.
If I had need of food, I would not give you word of it; for the earth is mine and all its wealth.
Am I to take the flesh of the ox for my food, or the blood of goats for my drink?
Make an offering of praise to God; keep the agreements which you have made with the Most High;
Let your voice come up to me in the day of trouble; I will be your saviour, so that you may give glory to me.
But to the sinner, God says, What are you doing, talking of my laws, or taking the words of my agreement in your mouth?
Seeing that you have no desire for my teaching, turning your back on my words.
When you saw a thief, you were in agreement with him, and you were joined with those who took other men's wives.
You have given your mouth to evil, your tongue to words of deceit.
You say evil of your brother; you make false statements against your mother's son.
These things have you done, and I said nothing; it seemed to you that I was such a one as yourself; but I will make a protest against you, and put them in order before your eyes.
Now keep this in mind, you who have no memory of God, for fear that you may be crushed under my hand, with no one to give you help:
Whoever makes an offering of praise gives glory to me; and to him who is upright in his ways I will make clear the salvation of God.To the chief music-maker. A Psalm. Of David. When Nathan the prophet came to him, after he had gone in to Bath-sheba.
Have pity on me, O God, in your mercy; out of a full heart, take away my sin.
Let all my wrongdoing be washed away, and make me clean from evil.
For I am conscious of my error; my sin is ever before me.
Against you, you only, have I done wrong, working that which is evil in your eyes; so that your words may be seen to be right, and you may be clear when you are judging.
Truly, I was formed in evil, and in sin did my mother give me birth.
Your desire is for what is true in the inner parts: in the secrets of my soul you will give me knowledge of wisdom.
Make me free from sin with hyssop: let me be washed whiter than snow.
Make me full of joy and rapture; so that the bones which have been broken may be glad.
Let your face be turned from my wrongdoing, and take away all my sins.
Make a clean heart in me, O God; give me a right spirit again.
Do not put me away from before you, or take your holy spirit from me.
Give me back the joy of your salvation; let a free spirit be my support.
Then will I make your ways clear to wrongdoers; and sinners will be turned to you.
Be my saviour from violent death, O God, the God of my salvation; and my tongue will give praise to your righteousness.
O Lord, let my lips be open, so that my mouth may make clear your praise.
You have no desire for an offering or I would give it; you have no delight in burned offerings.
The offerings of God are a broken spirit; a broken and sorrowing heart, O God, you will not put from you.
Do good to Zion in your good pleasure, building up the walls of Jerusalem.
Then you will have delight in the offerings of righteousness, in burned offerings and offerings of beasts; then they will make offerings of oxen on your altar.To the chief music-maker. Maschil. Of David. When Doeg the Edomite came to Saul saying, David has come to the house of Ahimelech.
Why do you take pride in wrongdoing, lifting yourself up against the upright man all the day?
Purposing destruction, using deceit; your tongue is like a sharp blade.
You have more love for evil than for good, for deceit than for works of righteousness. (Selah.)
Destruction is in all your words, O false tongue.
But God will put an end to you for ever; driving you out from your tent, uprooting you from the land of the living. (Selah.)
The upright will see it with fear, and will say, laughing at you:
See, this is the man who did not make God his strength, but had faith in his goods and his property, and made himself strong in his wealth.
But I am like a branching olive-tree in the house of God; I have put my faith in his mercy for ever and ever.
I will give you praise without end for what you have done; I will give honour to your name before your saints, for it is good.To the chief music-maker; put to Mahalath. Maschil. Of David.
The foolish man has said in his heart, God will not do anything. They are unclean, they have done evil works; there is not one who does good.
God was looking down from heaven on the children of men, to see if there were any who had wisdom, searching after God.
Every one of them has gone back; they are unclean: there is not one who does good, no, not one.
Have the workers of evil no knowledge? they take my people for food, as they would take bread; they make no prayer to God.
They were in great fear, where there was no cause for fear: for the bones of those who make war on you have been broken by God; you have put them to shame, because God has no desire for them.
May the salvation of Israel come out of Zion! When the fate of his people is changed by God, Jacob will have joy, and Israel will be glad.To the chief music-maker; on Neginoth. Maschil. Of David. When the Ziphites came and said to Saul, Is not David keeping himself secret among us?
Let your name be my salvation, O God; let my cause be judged by your strength.
Let my prayer come before you, O God; give ear to the words of my mouth.
For men who are going after me have come out against me, violent men are purposing to take my soul; they have not put God before their eyes. (Selah.)
See, God is my helper: the Lord is the great supporter of my soul.
Let the evil works of my haters come back on them again; let them be cut off by your good faith.
Freely will I make my offerings to you; I will give praise to your name, O Lord, for it is good.
Because it has been my saviour from all my trouble; and my eyes have seen the punishment of my haters.To the chief music-maker, on Neginoth. Maschil. Of David.
Give hearing to my prayer, O God; and let not your ear be shut against my request.
Give thought to me, and let my prayer be answered: I have been made low in sorrow;
I am troubled because of the voice of the cruel ones, because of the loud cry of the evil-doers; for they put a weight of evil on me, and they are cruel in their hate for me.
My heart is deeply wounded, and the fear of death has come on me.
Fear and shaking have come over me, with deep fear I am covered.
And I said, If only I had wings like a dove! for then I would go in flight from here and be at rest.
I would go wandering far away, living in the waste land. (Selah.)
I would quickly take cover from the driving storm and from the violent wind.
Send destruction on them, O Lord, make a division of tongues among them: for I have seen fighting and violent acts in the town.
By day and night they go round the town, on the walls; trouble and sorrow are in the heart of it.
Evil is there; cruel rule and deceit are ever in the streets.
For it was not my hater who said evil of me; that would have been no grief to me; it was not one outside the number of my friends who made himself strong against me, or I would have kept myself from him in a secret place;
But it was you, my equal, my guide, my well-loved friend.
We had loving talk together, and went to the house of God in company.
Let the hand of death come on them suddenly, and let them go down living into the underworld; because evil is in their houses and in their hearts.
As for me, I will make my prayer to God, and he will be my saviour.
In the evening and in the morning and in the middle of the day I will make my prayer with sounds of grief; and my voice will come to his ears.
He has taken my soul away from the attack which was made against me, and given it peace; for great numbers were against me.
God will give thought to me; he who from early times is strong will send pain and trouble on them. (Selah.) Because they are unchanged, they have no fear of God.
He has put out his hand against those who were at peace with him; he has not kept his agreement.
The words of his mouth were smoother than butter, but war was in his heart; his words were softer than oil, but they were sharp swords.
Put your cares on the Lord, and he will be your support; he will not let the upright man be moved.
But you, O God, will send them down into the underworld; the cruel and the false will be cut off before half their days are ended; but I will have faith in you.To the chief music-maker; put to Jonath elem rehokim. Of David. Michtam. When the Philistines took him in Gath.
Have mercy on me, O God, for man is attempting my destruction; every day he makes cruel attacks against me.
My haters are ever ready to put an end to me; great numbers are lifting themselves up against me.
In the time of my fear, I will have faith in you.
In God will I give praise to his word; in God have I put my hope; I will have no fear of what flesh may do to me.
Every day they make wrong use of my words; all their thoughts are against me for evil.
They come together, they are waiting in secret places, they take note of my steps, they are waiting for my soul.
By evil-doing they will not get free from punishment. In wrath, O God, let the peoples be made low.
You have seen my wanderings; put the drops from my eyes into your bottle; are they not in your record?
When I send up my cry to you, my haters will be turned back; I am certain of this, for God is with me.
In God will I give praise to his word; in the Lord will I give praise to his word.
In God have I put my hope, I will have no fear of what man may do to me.
I keep the memory of my debt to you, O God; I will give you the offerings of praise.
Becauseyouhavetakenmysoulfromthepowerofdeath; andkeptmyfeetfromfalling, so that I may be walking before God in the light of life.To the chief music-maker; put to Al-tashheth. Michtam. Of David. When he went in flight from Saul, in the hole of the rock.
Have mercy on me, O God, have mercy on me; for the hope of my soul is in you: I will keep myself safely under the shade of your wings, till these troubles are past.
I will send up my cry to the Most High God; to God who does all things for me.
He will send from heaven, and take me from the power of him whose desire is for my destruction. God will send out his mercy and his good faith.
My soul is among lions; I am stretched out among those who are on fire, even the sons of men, whose teeth are spears and arrows, and whose tongue is a sharp sword.
O God, be lifted up higher than the heavens; let your glory be over all the earth.
They have made ready a net for my steps; my soul is bent down; they have made a great hole before me, and have gone down into it themselves. (Selah.)
My heart is fixed, O God, my heart is fixed; I will make songs, and give praise.
You are my glory; let the instruments of music be awake; I myself will be awake with the dawn.
I will give you praise, O Lord, among the peoples; I will make songs to you among the nations.
For your mercy is great, stretching up to the heavens, and your righteousness goes up to the clouds.
Be lifted up, O God, higher than the heavens, let your glory be over all the earth.To the chief music-maker; put to Al-tashheth. Michtam. Of David.
Is there righteousness in your mouths, O you gods? are you upright judges, O you sons of men?
The purposes of your hearts are evil; your hands are full of cruel doings on the earth.
The evil-doers are strange from the first; from the hour of their birth they go out of the true way, saying false words.
Their poison is like the poison of a snake; they are like the adder, whose ears are shut;
Who will not be moved by the voice of the wonder-worker, however great are his powers.
O God, let their teeth be broken in their mouths; let the great teeth of the young lions be pulled out, O Lord.
Let them be turned to liquid like the ever-flowing waters; let them be cut off like the grass by the way.
Let them be like an after-birth which is turned to water and comes to an end; like the fruit of a woman who gives birth before her time, let them not see the sun.
Before they are conscious of it, let them be cut down like thorns; let a strong wind take them away like waste growth.
The upright man will be glad when he sees their punishment; his feet will be washed in the blood of the evil-doer.
So that men will say, Truly there is a reward for righteousness; truly there is a God who is judge on the earth.To the chief music-maker; put to At-tashheth. Michtam. Of David. When Saul sent, and they were watching the house, to put him to death.
Take me out of the hands of the cruel ones, O my God; keep me safe from those who come up against me.
Take me out of the power of the workers of evil, and keep me safe from the men of blood.
For see, they are watching in secret for my soul; the strong have come together against me? but not because of my sin, or my evil-doing, O Lord.
For no sin of mine they go quickly and get themselves ready; be awake and come to my help, and see.
You, O Lord God of armies, are the God of Israel; come now and give punishment to the nations; have no mercy on any workers of deceit. (Selah.)
They come back in the evening; they make a noise like a dog, and go round the town.
See, hate is dropping from their lips; curses are on their tongues: they say, Who gives attention to it?
But you are laughing at them, O Lord; you will make sport of all the nations.
O my strength, I will put my hope in you; because God is my strong tower.
The God of my mercy will go before me: God will let me see my desire effected on my haters.
Put them not to death, for so my people will keep the memory of them: let them be sent in all directions by your power; make them low, O Lord our saviour.
Because of the sin of their mouths and the word of their lips, let them even be taken in their pride; and for their curses and their deceit,
Put an end to them in your wrath, put an end to them, so that they may not be seen again; let them see that God is ruling in Jacob and to the ends of the earth. (Selah.)
And in the evening let them come back, and make a noise like a dog, and go round the town.
Let them go wandering up and down in search of food, and be there all night if they have not enough.
But I will make songs of your power; yes, I will give cries of joy for your mercy in the morning; because you have been my strength and my high tower in the day of my trouble.
To you, O my strength, will I make my song: because God is my high tower, even the God of my mercy.To the chief music-maker; put to Shushan-eduth. Michtam. Of David. For teaching. When he was fighting against Aram-naharaim and Aramzobah, when Joab came back, and put twelve thousand of the Edomites to death, in the Valley of Salt.
God, you have put us away from you, you have sent us in all directions, you have been angry; O be turned to us again.
By the power of your hand the earth is shaking and broken; make it strong again, for it is moved.
You have made the people see hard times; you have given us the wine of shaking for our drink.
Give a safe place to those who have fear of you, where they may go in flight from before the bow. (Selah.)
So that your loved ones may be made safe, let your right hand be my salvation, and give me an answer.
God has said in his holy place, I will be glad: I will make a division of Shechem, and the valley of Succoth will be measured out.
Gilead is mine, and Manasseh is mine; and Ephraim is the strength of my head; Judah is my law-giver;
Moab is my washpot; over Edom will I put out my shoe; over Philistia will a glad cry be sounded.
Who will take me into the strong town? who will be my guide into Edom?
Have not you put us away, O God? and you have not gone out with our armies.
Give us help in our trouble; for there is no help in man.
Through God we will do great things, for through him our haters will be crushed under our feet.To the chief music-maker. On a corded instrument. Of David.
Let my cry come to you, O God; let your ears be open to my prayer.
From the end of the earth will I send up my cry to you, when my heart is overcome: take me to the rock which is over-high for me.
For you have been my secret place, and my high tower from those who made war on me.
I will make your tent my resting-place for ever: I will keep myself under the cover of your wings. (Selah.)
For you, O God, have made answer to my prayers; you have given me the heritage of those who give honour to your name.
You will give the king long life; and make his years go on through the generations.
May the seat of his authority be before God for ever; may mercy and righteousness keep him safe.
So will I make songs in praise of your name for ever, giving to God that which is right day by day.To the chief music-maker. After Jeduthun. A Psalm. Of David.
My soul, put all your faith in God; for from him comes my salvation.
He only is my Rock and my salvation; he is my high tower; I will not be greatly moved.
How long will you go on designing evil against a man? running against him as against a broken wall, which is on the point of falling?
Their only thought is to put him down from his place of honour; their delight is in deceit: blessing is in their mouths but cursing in their hearts. (Selah.)
My soul, put all your faith in God; for from him comes my hope.
He only is my Rock and my salvation; he is my high tower; I will not be greatly moved.
In God is my salvation, and my glory; the Rock of my strength, and my safe place.
Have faith in him at all times, you people; let your hearts go flowing out before him: God is our safe place. (Selah.)
Truly men of low birth are nothing, and men of high position are not what they seem; if they are put in the scales together they are less than a breath.
Have no faith in the rewards of evil-doing, or in profits wrongly made: if your wealth is increased, do not put your hopes on it.
Once has God said, twice has it come to my ears, that power is God's:
And mercy, O Lord, is yours, for you give to every man the reward of his work.A Psalm. Of David. When he was in the waste land of Judah.
O God, you are my God; early will I make my search for you: my soul is dry for need of you, my flesh is wasted with desire for you, as a dry and burning land where no water is;
To see your power and your glory, as I have seen you in the holy place.
Because your mercy is better than life, my lips will give you praise.
So will I go on blessing you all my life, lifting up my hands in your name.
My soul will be comforted, as with good food; and my mouth will give you praise with songs of joy;
When the memory of you comes to me on my bed, and when I give thought to you in the night-time.
Because you have been my help, I will have joy in the shade of your wings.
My soul keeps ever near you: your right hand is my support.
But those whose desire is my soul's destruction will go down to the lower parts of the earth.
They will be cut off by the sword; they will be food for foxes.
But the king will have joy in God; everyone who takes an oath by him will have cause for pride; but the false mouth will be stopped.To the chief music-maker. A Psalm. Of David.
O God, let the voice of my grief come to your ear: keep my life from the fear of those who are against me.
Keep me safe from the secret purpose of wrongdoers; from the band of the workers of evil;
Who make their tongues sharp like a sword, and whose arrows are pointed, even bitter words;
So that in secret they may let loose their arrows at the upright, suddenly and unseen.
They make themselves strong in an evil purpose; they make holes for secret nets; they say, Who will see it,
Or make discovery of our secret purpose? The design is framed with care; and the inner thought of a man, and his heart, is deep.
But God sends out an arrow against them; suddenly they are wounded.
The evil of their tongues is the cause of their fall; all those who see them are shaking their heads at them.
And in fear men make public the works of God; and giving thought to his acts they get wisdom.
The upright will be glad in the Lord and have hope in him; and all the lovers of righteousness will give him glory.To the chief music-maker. A Psalm. Of David. A Song.
It is right for you, O God, to have praise in Zion: to you let the offering be made.
To you, O hearer of prayer, let the words of all flesh come.
Evils have overcome us: but as for our sins, you will take them away.
Happy is the man of your selection, to whom you give a resting-place in your house; we will be full of the good things out of your holy place.
You will give us an answer in righteousness by great acts of power, O God of our salvation; you who are the hope of all the ends of the earth, and of the far-off lands of the sea;
The God by whose strength the mountains are fixed; who is robed with power:
Who makes the loud voice of the sea quiet, and puts an end to the sound of its waves.
Those in the farthest parts of the earth have fear when they see your signs: the outgoings of the morning and evening are glad because of you.
You have given your blessing to the earth, watering it and making it fertile; the river of God is full of water: and having made it ready, you give men grain.
You make the ploughed lands full of water; you make smooth the slopes: you make the earth soft with showers, sending your blessing on its growth.
The year is crowned with the good you give; life-giving rain is dropping from your footsteps,
Falling on the grass of the waste land: and the little hills are glad on every side.
The grass-land is thick with flocks; the valleys are full of grain; they give glad cries and songs of joy.To the chief music-maker. A Song. A Psalm.
Send up a glad cry to God, all the earth:
Make a song in honour of his name: give praise and glory to him.
Say to God, How greatly to be feared are your works! because of your great power your haters are forced to put themselves under your feet.
Let all the earth give you worship, and make songs to you; let them make songs to your name. (Selah.)
Come and see the works of God: he is to be feared in all he does to the children of men.
The sea was turned into dry land: they went through the river on foot: there did we have joy in him.
He is ruling in power for ever; his eyes are watching the nations: may his haters have no strength against him. (Selah.)
Give blessings to our God, O you peoples, let the voice of his praise be loud;
Because he gives us life, and has not let our feet be moved.
For you, O God, have put us to the test: testing us by fire like silver.
You let us be put in prison; chains were put on our legs.
You let men go driving over our heads; we went through fire and through water; but you took us out into a wide place.
I will come into your house with burned offerings, I will make payment of my debt to you,
Keeping the word which came from my lips, and which my mouth said, when I was in trouble.
I will give you burned offerings of fat beasts, and the smoke of sheep; I will make offerings of oxen and goats. (Selah.)
Come, give ear to me, all you God-fearing men, so that I may make clear to you what he has done for my soul.
My voice went up to him, and I was lifted up from the underworld.
I said in my heart, The Lord will not give ear to me:
But truly God's ear has been open; he has give attention to the voice of my prayer.
Praise be to God who has not taken away his good faith and his mercy from me.To the chief music-maker. With corded instruments. A Psalm. A Song.
May God give us mercy and blessing, and let the light of his face be shining on us; (Selah.)
So that men may see your way on the earth, and your salvation among all nations.
Let the peoples give you praise, O God; let all the peoples give you praise.
O let the nations be glad, and make song of joy; for you will be the judge of the peoples in righteousness, guiding the nations of the earth. (Selah.)
Let the peoples give you praise, O God; let all the peoples give you praise.
The earth has given her increase; and God, even our God, will give us his blessing.
God will give us his blessing; so let all the ends of the earth be in fear of him.To the chief music-maker. Of David. A Psalm. A Song.
Let God be seen, and let his haters be put to flight; let those who are against him be turned back before him.
Let them be like smoke before the driving wind; as wax turning soft before the fire, so let them come to an end before the power of God.
But let the upright be glad; let them have delight before God; let them be full of joy.
Make songs to God, make songs of praise to his name; make a way for him who comes through the waste lands; his name is Jah; be glad before him.
A father to those who have no father, a judge of the widows, is God in his holy place.
Those who are without friends, God puts in families; he makes free those who are in chains; but those who are turned away from him are given a dry land.
O God, when you went out before your people, wandering through the waste land; (Selah.)
The earth was shaking and the heavens were streaming, because God was present; even Sinai itself was moved before God, the God of Israel.
You, O God, did freely send the rain, giving strength to the weariness of your heritage.
Those whose resting-place was there, even the poor, were comforted by your good things, O God.
The Lord gives the word; great is the number of the women who make it public.
Kings of armies quickly go in flight: and the women in the houses make a division of their goods.
Will you take your rest among the flocks? like the wings of a dove covered with silver, and its feathers with yellow gold.
When the Most High put the kings to flight, it was as white as snow in Salmon.
A hill of God is the hill of Bashan; a hill with high tops is the hill of Bashan.
Why are you looking with envy, you high hills, on the hill desired by God as his resting- place? truly, God will make it his house for ever.
The war-carriage of God is among Israel's thousands; the Lord has come from Sinai to the holy place.
You have gone up on high, taking your prisoners with you; you have taken offerings from men; the Lord God has taken his place on the seat of his power.
Praise be to the Lord, who is our support day by day, even the God of our salvation. (Selah.)
Our God is for us a God of salvation; his are the ways out of death.
The heads of the haters of God will be crushed; even the head of him who still goes on in his evil ways.
The Lord said, I will make them come back from Bashan, and from the deep parts of the sea;
So that your foot may be red with blood, and the tongues of your dogs with the same.
We see your going, O God: even the going of my God, my King, into the holy place.
The makers of songs go before, the players of music come after, among the young girls playing on brass instruments.
Give praise to God in the great meeting; even the Lord, you who come from the fountain of Israel.
There is little Benjamin ruling them, the chiefs of Judah and their army, the rulers of Zebulun and the rulers of Naphtali.
O God, send out your strength; the strength, O God, with which you have done great things for us,
Out of your Temple in Jerusalem.
Say sharp words to the beast among the water-plants, the band of strong ones, with the lords of the peoples, put an end to the people whose delight is in war.
Kings will give you offerings, they will come out of Egypt; from Pathros will come offerings of silver; Ethiopia will be stretching out her hands to God.
Make songs to God, you kingdoms of the earth; O make songs of praise to the Lord; (Selah.)
To him who goes or the clouds of heaven, the heaven which was from earliest times; he sends out his voice of power.
Make clear that strength is God's: he is lifted up over Israel, and his power is in the clouds.
O God, you are to be feared in your holy place: the God of Israel gives strength and power to his people. Praise be to God.To the chief music-maker; put to Shoshannim. Of David.
Be my saviour, O God; because the waters have come in, even to my neck.
My feet are deep in the soft earth, where there is no support; I have come into deep waters, the waves are flowing over me.
I am tired with my crying; my throat is burning: my eyes are wasted with waiting for my God.
Those who have hate for me without cause are greater in number than the hairs of my head; those who are against me, falsely desiring my destruction, are very strong; I gave back what I had not taken away.
O God, you see how foolish I am; and my wrongdoing is clear to you.
Let not those who have hope in you be put to shame because of me, O Lord God of armies: let not those who are waiting for you be made low because of me, O God of Israel.
I have been wounded with sharp words because of you; my face has been covered with shame.
I have become strange to my brothers, and like a man from a far country to my mother's children.
I am on fire with passion for your house; and the hard things which are said about you have come on me.
My bitter weeping, and my going without food, were turned to my shame.
When I put on the clothing of grief, they said evil of me.
I am a cause of wonder to those in authority; a song to those who are given to strong drink.
But as for me, let my prayer be made to you, O Lord, at a time when you are pleased; O God, give me an answer in your great mercy, for your salvation is certain.
Take me from the grip of the sticky earth, so that I may not go down into it; let me be lifted up from the deep waters.
Let me not be covered by the flowing waters; let not the deep waters go over my head, and let me not be shut up in the underworld.
Give an answer to my words, O Lord; for your mercy is good: be turned to me, because of your great pity.
Let not your face be covered from your servant, for I am in trouble; quickly give me an answer.
Come near to my soul, for its salvation: be my saviour, because of those who are against me.
You have seen my shame, how I was laughed at and made low; my haters are all before you.
My heart is broken by bitter words, I am full of grief; I made a search for some to have pity on me, but there was no one; I had no comforter.
They gave me poison for my food; and bitter wine for my drink.
Let their table before them be for their destruction; let their feasts become a net to take them.
Let their eyes be blind so that they may not see; let their bodies for ever be shaking.
Let your curse come on them; let the heat of your wrath overtake them.
Give their houses to destruction, and let there be no one in their tents.
Because they are cruel to him against whom your hand is turned; they make bitter the grief of him who is wounded by you.
Let their punishment be increased; let them not come into your righteousness.
Let their names be taken from the book of the living, let them not be numbered with the upright.
But I am poor and full of sorrow; let me be lifted up by your salvation, O Lord.
I will give praise to the name of God with a song; I will give glory to him for what he has done.
This will be more pleasing to the Lord than an ox, or a young ox of full growth.
The poor will see it and be glad: you who are lovers of God, let your hearts have life.
For the ears of the Lord are open to the poor, and he takes thought for his prisoners.
Let the heavens and the earth give praise to him, the seas, and everything moving in them.
For God will be the saviour of Zion, and the builder of the towns of Judah; so that it may be their resting-place and heritage.
The seed of his servants will have their part in it, and there the lovers of his name will have rest.To the chief music-maker. Of David. To keep in memory.
Let your salvation come quickly, O God; come quickly to my help, O Lord.
Let those who go after my soul have shame and trouble; let those who have evil designs against me be turned back and made foolish.
Let those who say Aha, aha! be turned back as a reward of their shame.
Let all those who are looking for you be glad and have joy in you; let the lovers of your salvation ever say, May God be great.
But I am poor and in need; come to me quickly, O God; you are my help and my saviour; let there be no waiting, O Lord.In you, O Lord, have I put my hope; let me never be shamed.
Keep me safe in your righteousness, and come to my help; give ear to my voice, and be my saviour.
Be my strong Rock, the strong place of my salvation; for you are my Rock, and my safe place.
O my God, take me out of the hand of the sinner, out of the hand of the evil and cruel man.
For you are my hope, O Lord God; I have had faith in you from the time when I was young.
You have been my support from the day of my birth; you took me out of my mother's body; my praise will be ever of you.
I am a wonder to all; but you are my strong tower.
My mouth will be full of your praise and glory all the day.
Do not give me up when I am old; be my help even when my strength is gone.
For my haters are waiting secretly for me; and those who are watching for my soul are banded together in their evil designs,
Saying, God has given him up; go after him and take him, for he has no helper.
O God, be not far from me; O my God, come quickly to my help.
Let those who say evil against my soul be overcome and put to shame; let my haters be made low and have no honour.
But I will go on ever hoping, and increasing in all your praise.
My mouth will make clear your righteousness and your salvation all the day; for they are more than may be measured.
I will give news of the great acts of the Lord God; my words will be of your righteousness, and of yours only.
O God, you have been my teacher from the time when I was young; and I have been talking of your works of wonder even till now.
Now when I am old and grey-headed, O God, give me not up; till I have made clear your strength to this generation, and your power to all those to come.
Your righteousness, O God, is very high; you have done great things; O God, who is like you?
You, who have sent great and bitter troubles on me, will give me life again, lifting me up from the deep waters of the underworld.
You will make me greater than before, and give me comfort on every side.
I will give praise to you with instruments of music, O my God, for you are true; I will make songs to you with music, O Holy One of Israel.
Joy will be on my lips when I make melody to you; and in my soul, to which you have given salvation.
My tongue will be talking of your righteousness all the day; for those whose purpose is to do me evil have been crushed and put to shame.Of Solomon.
Give the king your authority, O God, and your righteousness to the king's son.
May he be a judge of your people in righteousness, and make true decisions for the poor.
May the mountains give peace to the people, and the hills righteousness.
May he be a judge of the poor among the people, may he give salvation to the children of those who are in need; by him let the violent be crushed.
May his life go on as long as the sun and moon, through all generations.
May he come down like rain on the cut grass; like showers watering the earth.
In his days may the upright do well, living in peace as long as there is a moon in heaven.
Let his kingdom be from sea to sea, from the River to the ends of the earth.
Let those who are against him go down before him; and let his haters be low in the dust.
Let the kings of Tarshish and of the islands come back with offerings; let the kings of Sheba and Seba give of their stores.
Yes, let all kings go down before him; let all nations be his servants.
For he will be a saviour to the poor in answer to his cry; and to him who is in need, without a helper.
He will have pity on the poor, and be the saviour of those who are in need.
He will keep their souls free from evil designs and violent attacks; and their blood will be of value in his eyes.
May he have long life, and may gold from Sheba be given to him: may prayers be made for him at all times; may blessings be on him every day.
May there be wide-stretching fields of grain in the land, shaking on the top of the mountains, full of fruit like Lebanon: may its stems be unnumbered like the grass of the earth.
May his name go on for ever, as long as the sun: may men be blessing themselves by him; may all nations be blessing his name.
Praise be to the Lord God, the God of Israel, the only doer of wonders.
Praise to the glory of his noble name for ever; let all the earth be full of his glory. So be it, So be it.
The prayers of David, the son of Jesse, are ended.A Psalm. Of Asaph.
Truly, God is good to Israel, even to such as are clean in heart.
But as for me, my feet had almost gone from under me; I was near to slipping;
Because of my envy of the men of pride, when I saw the well-being of the wrongdoers.
For they have no pain; their bodies are fat and strong.
They are not in trouble as others are; they have no part in the unhappy fate of men.
For this reason pride is round them like a chain; they are clothed with violent behaviour as with a robe.
Their eyes are bursting with fat; they have more than their heart's desire.
Their thoughts are deep with evil designs; their talk from their seats of power is of cruel acts.
Their mouth goes up to heaven; their tongues go walking through the earth.
For this reason they are full of bread; and water is ever flowing for them.
And they say, How will the Lord see this? is there knowledge in the Most High?
Truly, such are the sinners; they do well at all times, and their wealth is increased.
As for me, I have made my heart clean to no purpose, washing my hands in righteousness;
For I have been troubled all the day; every morning have I undergone punishment.
If I would make clear what it is like, I would say, You are false to the generation of your children.
When my thoughts were turned to see the reason of this, it was a weariness in my eyes;
Till I went into God's holy place, and saw the end of the evil-doers.
You put their feet where there was danger of slipping, so that they go down into destruction.
How suddenly are they wasted! fears are the cause of their destruction.
As a dream when one is awake, they are ended; they are like an image gone out of mind when sleep is over.
My heart was made bitter, and I was pained by the bite of grief:
As for me, I was foolish, and without knowledge; I was like a beast before you.
But still I am ever with you; you have taken me by my right hand.
Your wisdom will be my guide, and later you will put me in a place of honour.
Whom have I in heaven but you? and having you I have no desire for anything on earth.
My flesh and my heart are wasting away: but God is the Rock of my heart and my eternal heritage.
For those who are far away from you will come to destruction: you will put an end to all those who have not kept faith with you.
But it is good for me to come near to God: I have put my faith in the Lord God, so that I may make clear all his works.Maschil. Of Asaph.
Of God, why have you put us away from you for ever? why is the fire of your wrath smoking against the sheep who are your care?
Keep in mind your band of worshippers, for whom you gave payment in the days which are past, whom you took for yourself as the people of your heritage; even this mountain of Zion, which has been your resting-place.
Go up and see the unending destruction; all the evil which your haters have done in the holy place;
Sending out their voices like lions among your worshippers; they have put up their signs to be seen.
They are cutting down, like a man whose blade is lifted up against the thick trees.
Your doors are broken down with hammers and iron blades.
They have put on fire your holy place; they have made the place of your name unclean, pulling it down to the earth.
They have said in their hearts, Let us put an end to them all together; they have given over to the fire all God's places of worship in the land.
We do not see our signs: there is no longer any prophet, or anyone among us to say how long.
O God, how long will those who are against us say cruel things? will the hater go on looking down on your name for ever?
Why are you keeping back your hand, and covering your right hand in your robe?
For from the past God is my King, working salvation in the earth.
The sea was parted in two by your strength; the heads of the great sea-beasts were broken.
The heads of the great snake were crushed by you; you gave them as food to the fishes of the sea.
You made valleys for fountains and springs; you made the ever-flowing rivers dry.
The day is yours and the night is yours: you made the light and the sun.
By you all the limits of the earth were fixed; you have made summer and winter.
Keep this in mind, O Lord, that your haters have said cruel things, and that your name has been looked down on by a people of evil behaviour.
O give not the soul of your dove to the hawk; let not the life of the poor go out of your memory for ever.
Keep in mind your undertaking; for the dark places of the earth are full of pride and cruel acts.
O let not the crushed be turned back in shame; let the low man and the poor give praise to your name.
Up! O God, be the judge of your cause; keep in mind the bitter things which the man of evil behaviour says against you every day.
Keep in mind the voice of your haters; the outcry of those who come against you goes up every day.To the chief music-maker; put to Al-tashheth. A Psalm. Of Asaph. A Song.
To you, O God, we give praise, to you we give praise: and those who give honour to your name make clear your works of power.
When the right time has come, I will be the judge in righteousness.
When the earth and all its people become feeble, I am the support of its pillars. (Selah.)
I say to the men of pride, Let your pride be gone: and to the sinners, Let not your horn be lifted up.
Let not your horn be lifted up: let no more words of pride come from your outstretched necks.
For honour does not come from the east, or from the west, or uplifting from the south;
But God is the judge, putting down one, and lifting up another.
For in the hand of the Lord is a cup, and the wine is red; it is well mixed, overflowing from his hand: he will make all the sinners of the earth take of it, even to the last drop.
But I will ever be full of joy, making songs of praise to the God of Jacob.
By him will all the horns of the sinners be cut off; but the horns of the upright will be lifted up.To the chief music-maker; put to Neginoth. A Psalm. Of Asaph. A Song.
In Judah is the knowledge of God; his name is great in Israel,
In Salem is his tent, his resting-place in Zion.
There were the arrows of the bow broken, there he put an end to body-cover, sword, and fight. (Selah.)
You are shining and full of glory, more than the eternal mountains.
Gone is the wealth of the strong, their last sleep has overcome them; the men of war have become feeble.
At the voice of your wrath, O God of Jacob, deep sleep has overcome carriage and horse.
You, you are to be feared; who may keep his place before you in the time of your wrath?
From heaven you gave your decision; the earth, in its fear, gave no sound,
When God took his place as judge, for the salvation of the poor on the earth. (Selah.)
The ... will give you praise; the rest of ...
Give to the Lord your God what is his by right; let all who are round him give offerings to him who is to be feared.
He puts an end to the wrath of rulers; he is feared by the kings of the earth.To the chief music-maker. After Jeduthun. Of Asaph. A Psalm.
I was crying to God with my voice; even to God with my voice, and he gave ear to me.
In the day of my trouble, my heart was turned to the Lord: my hand was stretched out in the night without resting; my soul would not be comforted.
I will keep God in memory, with sounds of grief; my thoughts are troubled, and my spirit is overcome. (Selah.)
You keep my eyes from sleep; I am so troubled that no words come.
My thoughts go back to the days of the past, to the years which are gone.
The memory of my song comes back to me in the night; my thoughts are moving in my heart; my spirit is searching with care.
Will the Lord put me away for ever? will he be kind no longer?
Is his mercy quite gone for ever? has his word come to nothing?
Has God put away the memory of his pity? are his mercies shut up by his wrath? (Selah.)
And I said, It is a weight on my spirit; but I will keep in mind the years of the right hand of the Most High.
I will keep in mind the works of Jah: I will keep the memory of your wonders in the past.
I will give thought to all your work, while my mind goes over your acts of power.
Your way, O God, is holy: what god is so great as our God?
You are the God who does works of power: you have made your strength clear to the nations.
With your arm you have made your people free, the sons of Jacob and Joseph. (Selah.)
The waters saw you, O God; the waters saw you, they were in fear: even the deep was troubled.
The clouds sent out water; the skies gave out a sound; truly, your arrows went far and wide.
The voice of your thunder went rolling on; the world was flaming with the light of the storm; the earth was shaking.
Your way was in the sea, and your road in the great waters; there was no knowledge of your footsteps.
You were guiding your people like a flock, by the hand of Moses and Aaron.Maschil. Of Asaph.
Give ear, O my people, to my law; let your ears be bent down to the words of my mouth.
Opening my mouth I will give out a story, even the dark sayings of old times;
Which have come to our hearing and our knowledge, as they were given to us by our fathers.
We will not keep them secret from our children; we will make clear to the coming generation the praises of the Lord and his strength, and the great works of wonder which he has done.
He put up a witness in Jacob, and made a law in Israel; which he gave to our fathers so that they might give knowledge of them to their children;
So that the generation to come might have knowledge of them, even the children of the future, who would give word of them to their children;
So that they might put their hope in God, and not let God's works go out of their minds, but keep his laws;
And not be like their fathers, a stiff-necked and uncontrolled generation; a generation whose heart was hard, whose spirit was not true to God.
The children of Ephraim, armed with bows, were turned back on the day of the fight.
They were not ruled by God's word, and they would not go in the way of his law;
They let his works go out of their memory, and the wonders which he had made them see.
He did great works before the eyes of their fathers, in the land of Egypt, in the fields of Zoan.
The sea was cut in two so that they might go through; the waters were massed together on this side and on that.
In the daytime he was guiding them in the cloud, and all through the night with a light of fire.
The rocks of the waste land were broken by his power, and he gave them drink as out of the deep waters.
He made streams come out of the rock; and waters came flowing down like rivers.
And they went on sinning against him even more, turning away from the Most High in the waste land;
Testing God in their hearts, requesting meat for their desire.
They said bitter words against God, saying, Is God able to make ready a table in the waste land?
See, the rock was cut open by his power, so that the water came rushing out, and overflowing streams; is he able to give us bread? is he able to get meat for his people?
So these things came to the Lord's ears, and he was angry; and a fire was lighted against Jacob, and wrath came up against Israel;
Because they had no faith in God, and no hope in his salvation.
And he gave orders to the clouds on high, and the doors of heaven were open;
And he sent down manna like rain for their food, and gave them the grain of heaven.
Man took part in the food of strong ones; he sent them meat in full measure.
He sent an east wind from heaven, driving on the south wind by his power.
He sent down meat on them like dust, and feathered birds like the sand of the sea,
And he let it come down into their resting-place, round about their tents.
So they had food and were full; for he gave them their desire;
But they were not turned from their desires; and while the food was still in their mouths,
The wrath of God came on them, and put to death the fattest of them, and put an end to the young men of Israel.
For all this they went on sinning even more, and had no faith in his great wonders.
So their days were wasted like a breath, and their years in trouble.
When he sent death on them, then they made search for him; turning to him and looking for him with care;
In the memory that God was their Rock, and the Most High God their saviour.
But their lips were false to him, and their tongues were untrue to him;
And their hearts were not right with him, and they did not keep their agreement with him.
But he, being full of pity, has forgiveness for sin, and does not put an end to man: frequently turning back his wrath, and not being violently angry.
So he kept in mind that they were only flesh; a breath which is quickly gone, and will not come again.
How frequently did they go against him in the waste land, and give him cause for grief in the dry places!
Again they put God to the test, and gave pain to the Holy One of Israel.
They did not keep in mind the work of his hand, or the day when he took them from the power of their haters;
How he had done his signs in Egypt, and his wonders in the field of Zoan;
So that their rivers were turned to blood, and they were not able to get drink from their streams.
He sent different sorts of flies among them, poisoning their flesh; and frogs for their destruction.
He gave the increase of their fields to worms, the fruits of their industry to the locusts.
He sent ice for the destruction of their vines; their trees were damaged by the bitter cold.
Ice was rained down on their cattle; thunderstorms sent destruction among the flocks.
He sent on them the heat of his wrath, his bitter disgust, letting loose evil angels among them.
He let his wrath have its way; he did not keep back their soul from death, but gave their life to disease.
He gave to destruction all the first sons of Egypt; the first-fruits of their strength in the tents of Ham;
But he took his people out like sheep, guiding them in the waste land like a flock.
He took them on safely so that they had no fear; but their haters were covered by the sea.
And he was their guide to his holy land, even to the mountain, which his right hand had made his;
Driving out nations before them, marking out the line of their heritage, and giving the people of Israel their tents for a resting-place.
But they were bitter against the Most High God, testing him, and not keeping his laws;
Their hearts were turned back and untrue like their fathers; they were turned to one side like a twisted bow.
They made him angry with their high places; moving him to wrath with their images.
When this came to God's ears he was very angry, and gave up Israel completely;
So that he went away from the holy place in Shiloh, the tent which he had put among men;
And he let his strength be taken prisoner, and gave his glory into the hands of his hater.
He gave his people up to the sword, and was angry with his heritage.
Their young men were burned in the fire; and their virgins were not praised in the bride-song.
Their priests were put to death by the sword, and their widows made no weeping for them.
Then was the Lord like one awaking from sleep, and like a strong man crying out because of wine.
His haters were turned back by his blows and shamed for ever.
And he put the tent of Joseph on one side, and took not the tribe of Ephraim;
But he took the tribe of Judah for himself, and the mountain of Zion, in which he had pleasure.
And he made his holy place like the high heaven, like the earth which is fixed by him for ever.
He took David to be his servant, taking him from the place of the flocks;
From looking after the sheep which were giving milk, he took him to give food to Jacob his people, and to Israel his heritage.
So he gave them food with an upright heart, guiding them by the wisdom of his hands.A Psalm. Of Asaph.
O God, the nations have come into your heritage; they have made your holy Temple unclean; they have made Jerusalem a mass of broken walls.
They have given the bodies of your servants as food to the birds of the air, and the flesh of your saints to the beasts of the earth.
Their blood has been flowing like water round about Jerusalem; there was no one to put them in their last resting-place.
We are looked down on by our neighbours, we are laughed at and made sport of by those who are round us.
How long, O Lord? will you be angry for ever? will your wrath go on burning like fire?
Let your wrath be on the nations who have no knowledge of you, and on the kingdoms who have not made prayer to your name.
For they have taken Jacob for their meat, and made waste his house.
Do not keep in mind against us the sins of our fathers; let your mercy come to us quickly, for we have been made very low.
Give us help, O God of our salvation, for the glory of your name; take us out of danger and give us forgiveness for our sins, because of your name.
Why may the nations say, Where is their God? Let payment for the blood of your servants be made openly among the nations before our eyes.
Let the cry of the prisoner come before you; with your strong arm make free the children of death;
And give punishment seven times over into the breast of our neighbours for the bitter words which they have said against you, O Lord.
So we your people, and the sheep of your flock, will give you glory for ever: we will go on praising you through all generations.To the chief music-maker; put to Shoshannim-eduth. Of Asaph. A Psalm.
Give ear, O Keeper of Israel, guiding Joseph like a flock; you who have your seat on the winged ones, let your glory be seen.
Before Ephraim and Benjamin and Manasseh, let your strength be awake from sleep, and come as our salvation.
Take us back again, O God; let us see the shining of your face, and let us be safe.
O Lord God of armies, how long will your wrath be burning against the rest of your people?
You have given them the bread of weeping for food; for their drink you have given them sorrow in great measure.
You make us a cause of war among our neighbours; our haters are laughing at us among themselves.
Take us back again, O God of armies; let us see the shining of your face, and let us be safe.
You took a vine out of Egypt: driving out the nations, and planting it in their land.
You made ready a place for it, so that it might take deep root, and it sent out its branches over all the land.
The mountains were covered with its shade, and the great trees with its branches.
It sent out its arms to the Sea, and its branches to the River.
Why are its walls broken down by your hands, so that all who go by may take its fruit?
It is uprooted by the pigs from the woods, the beasts of the field get their food from it.
Come back, O God of armies: from heaven let your eyes be turned to this vine, and give your mind to it,
Even to the tree which was planted by your right hand, and to the branch which you made strong for yourself.
It is burned with fire; it is cut down: they are made waste by the wrath of your face.
Let your hand be on the man of your right hand, on the son of man whom you made strong for yourself.
So will we not be turned back from you; keep us in life, and we will give praise to your name.
Take us back, O Lord God of armies; let us see the shining of your face, and let us be safe.To the chief music-maker; put to the Gittith. Of Asaph.
Make a song to God our strength: make a glad cry to the God of Jacob.
Take up the melody, playing on an instrument of music, even on corded instruments.
Let the horn be sounded in the time of the new moon, at the full moon, on our holy feast-day:
For this is a rule for Israel, and a law of the God of Jacob.
He gave it to Joseph as a witness, when he went out over the land of Egypt; then the words of a strange tongue were sounding in my ears.
I took the weight from his back; his hands were made free from the baskets.
You gave a cry in your trouble, and I made you free; I gave you an answer in the secret place of the thunder; I put you to the test at the waters of Meribah. (Selah.)
Give ear, O my people, and I will give you my word, O Israel, if you will only do as I say!
There is to be no strange god among you; you are not to give worship to any other god.
I am the Lord your God, who took you up from the land of Egypt: let your mouth be open wide, so that I may give you food.
But my people did not give ear to my voice; Israel would have nothing to do with me.
So I gave them up to the desires of their hearts; that they might go after their evil purposes.
If only my people would give ear to me, walking in my ways!
I would quickly overcome their haters: my hand would be turned against those who make war on them.
The haters of the Lord would be broken, and their destruction would be eternal.
I would give them the best grain for food; you would be full of honey from the rock.A Psalm. Of Asaph.
God is in the meeting-place of God; he is judging among the gods.
How long will you go on judging falsely, having respect for the persons of evil-doers? (Selah.)
Give ear to the cause of the poor and the children without fathers; let those who are troubled and in need have their rights.
Be the saviour of the poor and those who have nothing: take them out of the hand of the evil-doers.
They have no knowledge or sense; they go about in the dark: all the bases of the earth are moved.
I said, You are gods; all of you are the sons of the Most High:
But you will come to death like men, falling like one of the rulers of the earth.
Up! O God, come as judge of the earth; for all the nations are your heritage.A Song. A Psalm. Of Asaph.
O God, do not keep quiet: let your lips be open and take no rest, O God.
For see! those who make war on you are out of control; your haters are lifting up their heads.
They have made wise designs against your people, talking together against those whom you keep in a secret place.
They have said, Come, let us put an end to them as a nation; so that the name of Israel may go out of man's memory.
For they have all come to an agreement; they are all joined together against you:
The tents of Edom and the Ishmaelites; Moab and the Hagarites;
Gebal and Ammon and Amalek; the Philistines and the people of Tyre;
Assur is joined with them; they have become the support of the children of Lot. (Selah.)
Do to them what you did to the Midianites; what you did to Sisera and Jabin, at the stream of Kishon:
Who came to destruction at En-dor; their bodies became dust and waste.
Make their chiefs like Oreb and Zeeb; and all their rulers like Zebah and Zalmunna:
Who have said, Let us take for our heritage the resting-place of God.
O my God, make them like the rolling dust; like dry stems before the wind.
As fire burning a wood, and as a flame causing fire on the mountains,
So go after them with your strong wind, and let them be full of fear because of your storm.
Let their faces be full of shame; so that they may give honour to your name, O Lord.
Let them be overcome and troubled for ever; let them be put to shame and come to destruction;
So that men may see that you only, whose name is Yahweh, are Most High over all the earth.To the chief music-maker; put to the Gittith A Psalm. Of the sons of Korah.
How dear are your tents, O Lord of armies!
The passion of my soul's desire is for the house of the Lord; my heart and my flesh are crying out for the living God.
The little birds have places for themselves, where they may put their young, even your altars, O Lord of armies, my King and my God.
Happy are they whose resting-place is in your house: they will still be praising you. (Selah.)
Happy is the man whose strength is in you; in whose heart are the highways to Zion.
Going through the valley of balsam-trees, they make it a place of springs; it is clothed with blessings by the early rain.
They go from strength to strength; every one of them comes before God in Zion.
O Lord God of armies, let my prayer come to you: give ear, O God of Jacob. (Selah.)
O God, let your eyes be on him who is our safe cover, and let your heart be turned to your king.
For a day in your house is better than a thousand. It is better to be a door-keeper in the house of my God, than to be living in the tents of sin.
The Lord God is our sun and our strength: the Lord will give grace and glory: he will not keep back any good thing from those whose ways are upright.
O Lord of armies, happy is the man whose hope is in you.To the chief music-maker. A Psalm. Of the sons of Korah.
Lord, you were good to your land: changing the fate of Jacob.
The wrongdoing of your people had forgiveness; all their sin had been covered. (Selah.)
You were no longer angry: you were turned from the heat of your wrath.
Come back to us, O God of our salvation, and be angry with us no longer.
Will you go on being angry with us for ever? will you keep your wrath against us through all the long generations?
Will you not give us life again, so that your people may be glad in you?
Let us see your mercy, O Lord, and give us your salvation.
I will give ear to the voice of the Lord; for he will say words of peace to his people and to his saints; but let them not go back to their foolish ways.
Truly, his salvation is near to his worshippers; so that glory may be in our land.
Mercy and faith have come together; righteousness and peace have given one another a kiss.
Faith comes up from the earth like a plant; righteousness is looking down from heaven.
The Lord will give what is good; and our land will give its increase.
Righteousness will go before him, making a way for his footsteps.A Prayer. Of David.
Let your ears be open to my voice, O Lord, and give me an answer; for I am poor and in need.
Keep my soul, for I am true to you; O my God, give salvation to your servant, whose hope is in you.
Have mercy on me, O Lord; for my cry goes up to you all the day.
Make glad the soul of your servant; for it is lifted up to you, O Lord.
You are good, O Lord, and full of forgiveness; your mercy is great to all who make their cry to you.
O Lord, give ear to my prayer; and take note of the sound of my requests.
In the day of my trouble I send up my cry to you; for you will give me an answer.
There is no god like you, O Lord; there are no works like your works.
Let all the nations whom you have made come and give worship to you, O Lord, giving glory to your name.
For you are great, and do great works of wonder; you only are God.
Make your way clear to me, O Lord; I will go on my way in your faith: let my heart be glad in the fear of your name.
I will give you praise, O Lord my God, with all my heart; I will give glory to your name for ever.
For your mercy to me is great; you have taken my soul up from the deep places of the underworld.
O God, men of pride have come up against me, and the army of violent men would take my life; they have not put you before them.
But you, O Lord, are a God full of pity and forgiveness, slow to get angry, great in mercy and wisdom.
O be turned to me and have mercy on me: give your strength to your servant, and your salvation to the son of her who is your servant.
Give me a sign for good; so that my haters may see it and be shamed; because you, Lord, have been my help and comfort.Of the sons of Korah. A Psalm. A Song.
This house is resting on the holy mountain.
The Lord has more love for the doors of Zion than for all the tents of Jacob.
Noble things are said of you, O town of God. (Selah.)
Rahab and Babylon will be named among those who have knowledge of me; see, Philistia and Tyre, with Ethiopia; this man had his birth there.
And of Zion it will be said, This or that man had his birth there; and the Most High will make her strong.
The Lord will keep in mind, when he is writing the records of the people, that this man had his birth there. (Selah.)
The players on instruments will be there, and the dancers will say, All my springs are in you.A Song. A Psalm. Of the sons of Korah. To the chief music-maker; put to Mahalath Leannoth. Maschil. Of Heman the Ezrahite.
O Lord, God of my salvation, I have been crying to you for help by day and by night:
Let my prayer come before you; give ear to my cry:
For my soul is full of evils, and my life has come near to the underworld.
I am numbered among those who go down into the earth; I have become like a man for whom there is no help:
My soul is among the dead, like those in the underworld, to whom you give no more thought; for they are cut off from your care.
You have put me in the lowest deep, even in dark places.
The weight of your wrath is crushing me, all your waves have overcome me. (Selah.)
You have sent my friends far away from me; you have made me a disgusting thing in their eyes: I am shut up, and not able to come out.
My eyes are wasting away because of my trouble: Lord, my cry has gone up to you every day, my hands are stretched out to you.
Will you do works of wonder for the dead? will the shades come back to give you praise? (Selah.)
Will the story of your mercy be given in the house of the dead? will news of your faith come to the place of destruction?
May there be knowledge of your wonders in the dark? or of your righteousness where memory is dead?
But to you did I send up my cry, O Lord; in the morning my prayer came before you.
Lord, why have you sent away my soul? why is your face covered from me?
I have been troubled and in fear of death from the time when I was young; your wrath is hard on me, and I have no strength.
The heat of your wrath has gone over me; I am broken by your cruel punishments.
They are round me all the day like water; they have made a circle about me.
You have sent my friends and lovers far from me; I am gone from the memory of those who are dear to me.Maschil. Of Ethan the Ezrahite.
My song will be of the mercies of the Lord for ever: with my mouth will I make his faith clear to all generations.
For you have said, Mercy will be made strong for ever; my faith will be unchanging in the heavens.
I have made an agreement with the man of my selection, I have made an oath to David my servant;
I will make your seed go on for ever, your kingdom will be strong through all generations. (Selah.)
In heaven let them give praise for your wonders, O Lord; and your unchanging faith among the saints.
For who is there in the heavens in comparison with the Lord? who is like the Lord among the sons of the gods?
God is greatly to be feared among the saints, and to be honoured over all those who are about him.
O Lord God of armies, who is strong like you, O Jah? and your unchanging faith is round about you.
You have rule over the sea in storm; when its waves are troubled, you make them calm.
Rahab was crushed by you like one wounded to death; with your strong arm you put to flight all your haters.
Yours are the heavens, and the earth is yours; you have made the world, and everything which is in it.
You have made the north and the south; Tabor and Hermon are sounding with joy at your name.
Yours is an arm of power; strong is your hand and high your right hand.
The seat of your kingdom is resting on righteousness and right judging: mercy and good faith come before your face.
Happy are the people who have knowledge of the holy cry: the light of your face, O Lord, will be shining on their way.
In your name will they have joy all the day: in your righteousness will they be lifted up.
For you are the glory of their strength; in your pleasure will our horn be lifted up.
For our breastplate is the Lord; and our king is the Holy One of Israel's.
Then your voice came to your holy one in a vision, saying, I have put the crown on a strong one, lifting up one taken from among the people.
I have made discovery of David my servant; I have put my holy oil on his head.
My hand will be his support; my arm will give him strength.
The deceit of those who are against him will not overcome him; he will not be troubled by the sons of evil.
I will have those who are against him broken before his face, and his haters will be crushed under my blows.
But my faith and my mercy will be with him; and in my name will his horn be lifted up.
I will put his hand in the sea, and his right hand in the rivers.
He will say to me, You are my father, my God, and the Rock of my salvation.
And I will make him the first of my sons, most high over the kings of the earth.
I will keep my mercy for him for ever; my agreement with him will not be changed.
His seed will keep their place for ever; his kingdom will be eternal, like the heavens.
If his children give up my law, and are not ruled by my decisions;
If my rules are broken, and my orders are not kept;
Then I will send punishment on them for their sin; my rod will be the reward of their evil-doing.
But I will not take away my mercy from him, and will not be false to my faith.
I will be true to my agreement; the things which have gone out of my lips will not be changed.
I have made an oath once by my holy name, that I will not be false to David.
His seed will not come to an end for ever; the seat of his kingdom will be like the sun before me.
It will be fixed for ever like the moon; and the witness in heaven is true. (Selah.)
But you have put him away in disgust; you have been angry with the king of your selection.
You have made your agreement with your servant of no effect: you have had no respect for his crown, it has come down even to the earth.
All his walls are broken down; you have given his strong towers to destruction.
All those who come by take away his goods; he is laughed at by his neighbours.
You have given power to the right hand of his haters; you have made glad all those who are against him.
His sword is turned back; you have not been his support in the fight.
You have put an end to his glory: the seat of his kingdom has been levelled to the earth.
You have made him old before his time; he is covered with shame. (Selah.)
How long, O Lord, will you Keep yourself for ever from our eyes? how long will your wrath be burning like fire?
See how short my time is; why have you made all men for no purpose?
What man now living will not see death? will he be able to keep back his soul from the underworld? (Selah.)
Lord, where are your earlier mercies? where is the oath which you made to David in unchanging faith?
Keep in mind, O Lord, the shame of your servants, and how the bitter words of all the people have come into my heart;
The bitter words of your haters, O Lord, shaming the footsteps of your king.
Let the Lord be praised for ever. So be it, So be it.A Prayer of Moses, the man of God.
Lord, you have been our resting-place in all generations.
Before the mountains were made, before you had given birth to the earth and the world, before time was, and for ever, you are God.
You send man back to his dust; and say, Go back, you children of men.
For to you a thousand years are no more than yesterday when it is past, and like a watch in the night.
...
In the morning it is green; in the evening it is cut down, and becomes dry.
We are burned up by the heat of your passion, and troubled by your wrath.
You have put our evil doings before you, our secret sins in the light of your face.
For all our days have gone by in your wrath; our years come to an end like a breath.
The measure of our life is seventy years; and if through strength it may be eighty years, its pride is only trouble and sorrow, for it comes to an end and we are quickly gone.
Who has knowledge of the power of your wrath, or who takes note of the weight of your passion?
So give us knowledge of the number of our days, that we may get a heart of wisdom.
Come back, O Lord; how long? let your purpose for your servants be changed.
In the morning give us your mercy in full measure; so that we may have joy and delight all our days.
Make us glad in reward for the days of our sorrow, and for the years in which we have seen evil.
Make your work clear to your servants, and your glory to their children.
Let the pleasure of the Lord our God be on us: O Lord, give strength to the work of our hands.Happy is he whose resting-place is in the secret of the Lord, and under the shade of the wings of the Most High;
Who says of the Lord, He is my safe place and my tower of strength: he is my God, in whom is my hope.
He will take you out of the bird-net, and keep you safe from wasting disease.
You will be covered by his feathers; under his wings you will be safe: his good faith will be your salvation.
You will have no fear of the evil things of the night, or of the arrow in flight by day,
Or of the disease which takes men in the dark, or of the destruction which makes waste when the sun is high.
You will see a thousand falling by your side, and ten thousand at your right hand; but it will not come near you.
Only with your eyes will you see the reward of the evil-doers.
Because you have said, I am in the hands of the Lord, the Most High is my safe resting- place;
No evil will come on you, and no disease will come near your tent.
For he will give you into the care of his angels to keep you wherever you go.
In their hands they will keep you up, so that your foot may not be crushed against a stone.
You will put your foot on the lion and the snake; the young lion and the great snake will be crushed under your feet.
Because he has given me his love, I will take him out of danger: I will put him in a place of honour, because he has kept my name in his heart.
When his cry comes up to me, I will give him an answer: I will be with him in trouble; I will make him free from danger and give him honour.
With long life will he be rewarded; and I will let him see my salvation.A Psalm. A Song for the Sabbath.
It is a good thing to give praise to the Lord, and to make melody to your name, O Most High;
To make clear your mercy in the morning, and your unchanging faith every night;
On a ten-corded instrument, and on an instrument of music with a quiet sound.
For you, O Lord, have made me glad through your work; I will have joy in the works of your hands.
O Lord, how great are your works! and your thoughts are very deep.
A man without sense has no knowledge of this; and a foolish man may not take it in.
When the sinners come up like the grass, and all the workers of evil do well for themselves, it is so that their end may be eternal destruction.
But you, O Lord, are on high for ever.
For see! your haters, O Lord, will be put to death; all the workers of evil will be put to flight;
But my horn is lifted up like the horn of the ox: the best oil is flowing on my head.
My eyes have seen trouble come on my haters; my ears have news of the fate of the evil-doers who have come up against me.
The good man will be like a tall tree in his strength; his growth will be as the wide- stretching trees of Lebanon.
Those who are planted in the house of the Lord will come up tall and strong in his gardens.
They will give fruit even when they are old; they will be fertile and full of growth;
For a sign that the Lord is upright; he is my Rock, there is no deceit in him.The Lord is King; he is clothed with glory; the Lord is clothed with strength; power is the cord of his robe; the world is fixed, so that it may not be moved.
The seat of your power has been from the past; you are eternal.
The rivers send up, O Lord, the rivers send up their voices; they send them up with a loud cry.
The Lord in heaven is stronger than the noise of great waters, yes, he is stronger than the great waves of the sea.
Your witness is most certain; it is right for your house to be holy, O Lord, for ever.O God, in whose hands is punishment, O God of punishment, let your shining face be seen.
Be lifted up, O judge of the earth; let their reward come to the men of pride.
How long will sinners, O Lord, how long will sinners have joy over us?
Words of pride come from their lips; all the workers of evil say great things of themselves.
Your people are crushed by them, O Lord, your heritage is troubled,
They put to death the widow and the guest, they take the lives of children who have no father;
And they say, Jah will not see it, the God of Jacob will not give thought to it.
Give your mind to my words, you who are without wisdom among the people; you foolish men, when will you be wise?
Has he by whom your ears were planted no hearing? or is he blind by whom your eyes were formed?
He who is the judge of the nations, will he not give men the reward of their acts, even he who gives knowledge to man?
The Lord has knowledge of the thoughts of man, for they are only a breath.
Happy is the man who is guided by you, O Jah, and to whom you give teaching out of your law;
So that you may give him rest from the days of evil, till a hole is made ready for the destruction of the sinners.
The Lord will not give up his people, or take away his support from his heritage;
But decisions will again be made in righteousness; and they will be kept by all whose hearts are true.
Who will give me help against the sinners? and who will be my support against the workers of evil?
If the Lord had not been my helper, my soul would quickly have gone down into death.
If I say, My foot is slipping; your mercy, O Lord, is my support.
Among all my troubled thoughts, your comforts are the delight of my soul.
What part with you has the seat of sin, which makes evil into a law?
They are banded together against the soul of the upright, to give decisions against those who have done no wrong.
But the Lord is my safe resting-place; my God is the Rock where I am safe.
And he has made their evil designs come back on themselves, cutting them off in their sin; the Lord our God will put an end to them.O come, let us make songs to the Lord; sending up glad voices to the Rock of our salvation.
Let us come before his face with praises; and make melody with holy songs.
For the Lord is a great God, and a great King over all gods.
The deep places of the earth are in his hand; and the tops of the mountains are his.
The sea is his, and he made it; and the dry land was formed by his hands.
O come, let us give worship, falling down on our knees before the Lord our Maker.
For he is our God; and we are the people to whom he gives food, and the sheep of his flock. Today, if you would only give ear to his voice!
Let not your hearts be hard, as at Meribah, as in the day of Massah in the waste land;
When your fathers put me to the test and saw my power and my work.
For forty years I was angry with this generation, and said, They are a people whose hearts are turned away from me, for they have no knowledge of my ways;
And I made an oath in my wrath, that they might not come into my place of rest.O make a new song to the Lord; let all the earth make melody to the Lord.
Make songs to the Lord, blessing his name; give the good news of his salvation day by day.
Make clear his glory to the nations, and his wonders to all the peoples.
For the Lord is great, and greatly to be praised; he is more to be feared than all other gods.
For all the gods of the nations are false gods; but the Lord made the heavens.
Honour and glory are before him: strong and fair is his holy place.
Give to the Lord, O you families of the peoples, give to the Lord glory and strength.
Give to the Lord the glory of his name; take with you an offering and come into his house.
O give worship to the Lord in holy robes; be in fear before him, all the earth.
Say among the nations, The Lord is King; yes, the world is ordered so that it may not be moved; he will be an upright judge of the peoples.
Let the heavens have joy and the earth be glad; let the sea be thundering with all its waters;
Let the field be glad, and everything which is in it; yes, let all the trees of the wood be sounding with joy,
Before the Lord, for he is come; he is come to be the judge of the earth; the earth will be judged in righteousness, and the peoples with unchanging faith.The Lord is King, let the earth have joy; let all the sea-lands be glad.
Dark clouds are round him; his kingdom is based on righteousness and right judging.
Fire goes before him, burning up all those who are against him round about.
His bright flames give light to the world; the earth saw it with fear.
The mountains became like wax at the coming of the Lord, at the coming of the Lord of all the earth.
The heavens gave out the news of his righteousness, and all the people saw his glory.
Shamed be all those who give worship to images, and take pride in false gods; give him worship, all you gods.
Zion gave ear and was glad; and the daughters of Judah were full of joy, because of your decisions, O Lord.
For you, Lord, are most high over the earth; you are lifted up over all other gods.
You who are lovers of the Lord, be haters of evil; he keeps the souls of his saints; he takes them out of the hand of sinners.
Light is shining on the lovers of righteousness, and for the upright in heart there is joy.
Be glad in the Lord, you upright men; praising the memory of his holy name.The Lord is King; let the peoples be in fear: his seat is on the winged ones; let the earth be moved.
The Lord is great in Zion; he is high over all the nations.
Let them give praise to your name, for it is great and to be feared; holy is he.
The king's power is used for righteousness; you give true decisions, judging rightly in the land of Jacob.
Give high honour to the Lord our God, worshipping at his feet; holy is he.
Moses and Aaron among his priests, and Samuel among those who gave honour to his name; they made prayers to the Lord, and he gave answers to them.
His voice came to them from the pillar of cloud; they kept his witness, and the law which he gave them.
You gave them an answer, O Lord our God; you took away their sin, though you gave them punishment for their wrongdoing.
Give high honour to the Lord our God, worshipping with your faces turned to his holy hill; for the Lord our God is holy.A Psalm. Of David.
I will make a song of mercy and righteousness; to you, O Lord, will I make melody.
I will do wisely in the way of righteousness: O when will you come to me? I will be walking in my house with a true heart.
I will not put any evil thing before my eyes; I am against all turning to one side; I will not have it near me.
The false heart I will send away from me: I will not have an evil-doer for a friend.
I will put to death anyone who says evil of his neighbour secretly; the man with a high look and a heart of pride is disgusting to me.
My eyes will be on those of good faith in the land, so that they may be living in my house; he who is walking in the right way will be my servant.
The worker of deceit will not come into my house; the false man will have no place before my eyes.
Morning by morning will I put to death all the sinners in the land, so that all evil-doers may be cut off from Jerusalem.Of David.
Give praise to the Lord, O my soul; let everything in me give praise to his holy name.
Give praise to the Lord, O my soul; let not all his blessings go from your memory.
He has forgiveness for all your sins; he takes away all your diseases;
He keeps back your life from destruction, crowning you with mercy and grace.
He makes your mouth full of good things, so that your strength is made new again like the eagle's.
The Lord gives decisions in righteousness for all who are in trouble.
He gave knowledge of his way to Moses, and made his acts clear to the children of Israel.
The Lord is kind and full of pity, not quickly made angry, but ever ready to have mercy.
His feeling will no longer be bitter; he will not keep his wrath for ever.
He has not given us the punishment for our sins, or the reward of our wrongdoing.
For as the heaven is high over the earth, so great is his mercy to his worshippers.
As far as the east is from the west, so far has he put our sins from us.
As a father has pity on his children, so the Lord has pity on his worshippers.
For he has knowledge of our feeble frame; he sees that we are only dust.
As for man, his days are as grass: his beautiful growth is like the flower of the field.
The wind goes over it and it is gone; and its place sees it no longer.
But the mercy of the Lord is eternal for his worshippers, and their children's children will see his righteousness;
If they keep his agreement, and have his laws in mind to do them.
The Lord has made ready his high seat in the heavens; his kingdom is ruling over all.
Give praise to the Lord, you his angels, who are great in strength, doing his orders, and waiting for his voice.
Give praise to the Lord, all you his armies; and you his servants who do his pleasure.
Give praise to the Lord, all his works, in all places under his rule: give praise to the Lord, O my soul.Give praise to the Lord, O my soul. O Lord my God, you are very great; you are robed with honour and power.
You are clothed with light as with a robe; stretching out the heavens like a curtain:
The arch of your house is based on the waters; you make the clouds your carriage; you go on the wings of the wind:
He makes winds his angels, and flames of fire his servants.
He has made the earth strong on its bases, so that it may not be moved for ever and ever;
Covering it with the sea as with a robe: the waters were high over the mountains;
At the voice of your word they went in flight; at the sound of your thunder they went away in fear;
The mountains came up and the valleys went down into the place which you had made ready for them.
You made a limit over which they might not go, so that the earth would never again be covered by them.
You sent the springs into the valleys; they are flowing between the hills.
They give drink to every beast of the field; the mountain asses come to them for water.
The birds of the air have their resting-places by them, and make their song among the branches.
He sends down rain from his store-houses on the hills: the earth is full of the fruit of his works.
He makes the grass come up for the cattle, and plants for the use of man; so that bread may come out of the earth;
And wine to make glad the heart of man, and oil to make his face shining, and bread giving strength to his heart.
The trees of the Lord are full of growth, the cedars of Lebanon of his planting;
Where the birds have their resting-places; as for the stork, the tall trees are her house.
The high hills are a safe place for the mountain goats, and the rocks for the small beasts.
He made the moon for a sign of the divisions of the year; teaching the sun the time of its going down.
When you make it dark, it is night, when all the beasts of the woods come quietly out of their secret places.
The young lions go thundering after their food; searching for their meat from God.
The sun comes up, and they come together, and go back to their secret places to take their rest.
Man goes out to his work, and to his business, till the evening.
O Lord, how great is the number of your works! in wisdom you have made them all; the earth is full of the things you have made.
There is the great, wide sea, where there are living things, great and small, more than may be numbered.
There go the ships; there is that great beast, which you have made as a plaything.
All of them are waiting for you, to give them their food in its time.
They take what you give them; they are full of the good things which come from your open hand.
If your face is veiled, they are troubled; when you take away their breath, they come to an end, and go back to the dust.
If you send out your spirit, they are given life; you make new the face of the earth.
Let the glory of the Lord be for ever; let the Lord have joy in his works:
At whose look the earth is shaking; at whose touch the mountains send out smoke.
I will make songs to the Lord all my life; I will make melody to my God while I have my being.
Let my thoughts be sweet to him: I will be glad in the Lord.
Let sinners be cut off from the earth, and let all evil-doers come to an end. Give praise to the Lord, O my soul. Give praise to the Lord.O give praise to the Lord; give honour to his name, talking of his doings among the peoples.
Let your voice be sounding in songs and melody; let all your thoughts be of the wonder of his works.
Have glory in his holy name; let the hearts of those who are searching after the Lord be glad.
Let your search be for the Lord and for his strength; let your hearts ever be turned to him.
Keep in mind the great works which he has done; his wonders, and the decisions of his mouth;
O you seed of Abraham, his servant, you children of Jacob, his loved ones.
He is the Lord our God: he is judge of all the earth.
He has kept his agreement in mind for ever, the word which he gave for a thousand generations;
The agreement which he made with Abraham, and his oath to Isaac;
And he gave it to Jacob for a law, and to Israel for an eternal agreement;
Saying, To you will I give the land of Canaan, the measured line of your heritage:
When they were still small in number, and strange in the land;
When they went about from one nation to another, and from one kingdom to another people.
He would not let anyone do them wrong; he even kept back kings because of them,
Saying, Put not your hand on those who have been marked with my holy oil, and do my prophets no wrong.
And he took away all food from the land, so that the people were without bread.
He sent a man before them, even Joseph, who was given as a servant for a price:
His feet were fixed in chains; his neck was put in iron bands;
Till the time when his word came true; he was tested by the word of the Lord.
The king sent men to take off his chains; even the ruler of the people, who let him go free.
He made him lord of his house, and ruler over everything he had;
To give his chiefs teaching at his pleasure, and so that his law-givers might get wisdom from him.
Then Israel came into Egypt, and Jacob was living in the land of Ham.
And his people were greatly increased, and became stronger than those who were against them.
Their hearts were turned to hate against his people, so that they made secret designs against them.
He sent Moses, his servant, and Aaron, the man of his selection.
He let his signs be seen among the people, and his wonders in the land of Ham.
He sent black night and made it dark; and they did not go against his word.
At his word their waters were turned to blood, and he sent death on all their fish.
Their land was full of frogs, even in the rooms of the king.
He gave the word, and there came the dog-fly, and insects over all the land.
He gave them ice for rain, and flaming fire in their land.
He gave their vines and their fig-trees to destruction, and the trees of their land were broken down.
At his word the locusts came, and young locusts more than might be numbered,
And put an end to all the plants of their land, taking all the fruit of the earth for food.
He put to death the first child of every family in the land, the first-fruits of their strength.
He took his people out with silver and gold: there was not one feeble person among them.
Egypt was glad when they went; for the fear of them had come down on them.
A cloud was stretched over them for a cover; and he sent fire to give light in the night.
At the people's request he sent birds, and gave them the bread of heaven for food.
His hand made the rock open, and the waters came streaming out; they went down through the dry places like a river.
For he kept in mind his holy word, and Abraham, his servant.
And he took his people out with joy, the men of his selection with glad cries:
And gave them the lands of the nations; and they took the work of the peoples for a heritage;
So that they might keep his orders, and be true to his laws. Give praise to the Lord.Let the Lord be praised. O give praise to the Lord, for he is good: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
Who is able to give an account of the great acts of the Lord, or to make clear all his praise?
Happy are they whose decisions are upright, and he who does righteousness at all times.
Keep me in mind, O Lord, when you are good to your people; O let your salvation come to me;
So that I may see the well-being of the people of your selection, and have a part in the joy of your nation, and take pride in your heritage.
We are sinners like our fathers, we have done wrong, our acts are evil.
Our fathers did not give thought to your wonders in Egypt; they did not keep in memory the great number of your mercies, but gave you cause for wrath at the sea, even at the Red Sea.
But he was their saviour because of his name, so that men might see his great power.
By his word the Red Sea was made dry: and he took them through the deep waters as through the waste land.
And he took them safely out of the hands of their haters, and kept them from the attacks of those who were against them.
And the waters went over their haters; all of them came to an end.
Then they had faith in his words; they gave him songs of praise.
But their memory of his works was short; not waiting to be guided by him,
They gave way to their evil desires in the waste land, and put God to the test in the dry places.
And he gave them their request, but sent a wasting disease into their souls.
They were full of envy against Moses among the tents, and against Aaron, the holy one of the Lord.
The earth opening put an end to Dathan, covering up Abiram and his band.
And a fire was lighted among their tents; the sinners were burned up by the flames.
They made a young ox in Horeb, and gave worship to an image of gold.
And their glory was changed into the image of an ox, whose food is grass.
They had no memory of God their saviour, who had done great things in Egypt;
Works of wonder in the land of Ham, and things of fear by the Red Sea.
And he was purposing to put an end to them if Moses, his special servant, had not gone up before him, between him and his people, turning back his wrath, to keep them from destruction.
They were disgusted with the good land; they had no belief in his word;
Talking against him secretly in their tents, they did not give ear to the voice of the Lord.
So he made an oath against them, to put an end to them in the waste land:
That their children might be mixed among the nations, and sent away into other lands.
And they were joined to Baal-peor, and took part in the offerings to the dead.
So they made him angry by their behaviour; and he sent disease on them.
Then Phinehas got up, and made prayer for them; and the disease went no farther.
And all the generations coming after him kept the memory of his righteousness for ever.
They made God angry again at the waters of Meribah, so that Moses was troubled because of them;
For they made his spirit bitter, and he said unwise things.
They did not put an end to the peoples, as the Lord had said;
But they were joined to the nations, learning their works.
And they gave worship to images; which were a danger to them:
They even made offerings of their sons and their daughters to evil spirits,
And gave the blood of their sons and their daughters who had done no wrong, offering them to the images of Canaan; and the land was made unclean with blood.
So they became unclean through their works, going after their evil desires.
Then the wrath of the Lord was burning against his people, and he was angry with his heritage.
And he gave them into the hands of the nations; and they were ruled by their haters.
By them they were crushed, and made low under their hands.
Again and again he made them free; but their hearts were turned against his purpose, and they were overcome by their sins.
But when their cry came to his ears, he had pity on their trouble:
And kept in mind his agreement with them, and in his great mercy gave them forgiveness.
He put pity into the hearts of those who made them prisoners.
Be our saviour, O Lord our God, and let us come back together from among the nations, so that we may give honour to your holy name, and have glory in your praise.
Praise be to the Lord God of Israel for ever and for ever; and let all the people say, So be it. Give praise to the Lord.O give praise to the Lord, for he is good: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
Let those whose cause the Lord has taken up say so, his people whom he has taken out of the hands of their haters;
Making them come together out of all the lands, from the east and from the west, from the north and from the south.
They were wandering in the waste places; they saw no way to a resting-place.
Their souls became feeble for need of food and drink.
Then they sent up their cry to the Lord in their sorrow, and he gave them salvation out of all their troubles;
Guiding them in the right way, so that they might come into the town of their resting- place.
Let men give praise to the Lord for his mercy, and for the wonders which he does for the children of men!
He gives its desire to the unresting soul, so that it is full of good things.
Those who were in the dark, in the black night, in chains of sorrow and iron;
Because they went against the words of God, and gave no thought to the laws of the Most High:
So that he made their hearts weighted down with grief; they were falling, and had no helper.
Then they sent up their cry to the Lord in their sorrow, and he gave them salvation out of all their troubles.
He took them out of the dark and the black night, and all their chains were broken.
Let men give praise to the Lord for his mercy, and for the wonders which he does for the children of men!
The doors of brass are broken by his arm, and the bands of iron are cut in two.
Foolish men, because of their sins, and because of their wrongdoing, are troubled;
They are disgusted by all food, and they come near to the doors of death.
Then they send up their cry to the Lord in their sorrow, and he gives them salvation out of all their troubles.
He sent his word and made them well, and kept them safe from the underworld.
Let men give praise to the Lord for his mercy, and for the wonders which he does for the children of men!
Let them make offerings of praise, giving news of his works with cries of joy.
Those who go down to the sea in ships, who do business in the great waters;
They see the works of the Lord, and his wonders in the deep.
For at his word comes up the storm-wind, lifting high the waves.
The sailors go up to heaven, and down into the deep; their souls are wasted because of their trouble.
They are turned here and there, rolling like a man who is full of wine; and all their wisdom comes to nothing.
Then they send up their cry to the Lord in their sorrow, and he gives them salvation out of all their troubles.
He makes the storm into a calm, so that the waves are at peace.
Then they are glad, because the sea is quiet, and he takes them to the harbour of their desire.
Let men give praise to the Lord for his mercy, and for the wonders which he does for the children of men!
Let them give glory to him in the meeting of the people, and praise among the chiefs.
He makes rivers into waste places, and springs of water into a dry land;
He makes a fertile country into a salt waste, because of the sins of those who are living there.
He makes a waste land into a place of water, and a dry land into water-springs.
And there he gives the poor a resting-place, so that they may make themselves a town;
And put seed in the fields and make vine-gardens, to give them fruit.
He gives them his blessing so that they are increased greatly, and their cattle do not become less.
And when they are made low, and crushed by trouble and sorrow,
He puts an end to the pride of kings, and sends them wandering in the waste lands where there is no way.
But he puts the poor man on high from his troubles, and gives him families like a flock.
The upright see it and are glad: the mouth of the sinner is stopped.
Let the wise give thought to these things, and see the mercies of the Lord.A Song. A Psalm. Of David.
O God, my heart is fixed; I will make songs and melody, even with my glory.
Give out your sounds, O corded instruments: the dawn will be awaking with my song.
I will give you praise, O Lord, among the peoples; I will make melody to you among the nations.
For your mercy is higher than the heavens: and your unchanging faith than the clouds.
Be lifted up, O God, higher than the heavens; let your glory be over all the earth.
Let your right hand be stretched out for salvation, and give me an answer, so that your loved ones may be safe from danger.
This is the word of the holy God: I will be glad; I will make Shechem a heritage, measuring out the valley of Succoth.
Gilead is mine; Manasseh is mine; Ephraim is the strength of my head; Judah is my law-giver;
Moab is my washpot; on Edom is the resting-place of my shoe; over Philistia will I send out a glad cry.
Who will take me into the strong town? who will be my guide into Edom?
Have you not sent us away from you, O God? and you go not out with our armies.
Give us help in our trouble; for there is no help in man.
With God we will do great things; for by him will our haters be crushed underfoot.To the chief music-maker. Of David. A Psalm.
God of my praise, let my prayer be answered;
For the mouth of the sinner is open against me in deceit: his tongue has said false things against me.
Words of hate are round about me; they have made war against me without cause.
For my love they give me back hate; but I have given myself to prayer.
They have put on me evil for good; hate in exchange for my love.
Put an evil man over him; and let one be placed at his right hand to say evil of him.
When he is judged, let the decision go against him; and may his prayer become sin.
Let his life be short; let another take his position of authority.
Let his children have no father, and his wife be made a widow.
Let his children be wanderers, looking to others for their food; let them be sent away from the company of their friends.
Let his creditor take all his goods; and let others have the profit of his work.
Let no man have pity on him, or give help to his children when he is dead.
Let his seed be cut off; in the coming generation let their name go out of memory.
Let the Lord keep in mind the wrongdoing of his fathers; and may the sin of his mother have no forgiveness.
Let them be ever before the eyes of the Lord, so that the memory of them may be cut off from the earth.
Because he had no mercy, but was cruel to the low and the poor, designing the death of the broken-hearted.
As he took pleasure in cursing, so let it come on him; and as he had no delight in blessing, let it be far from him.
He put on cursing like a robe, and it has come into his body like water, and into his bones like oil.
Let it be to him as a robe which he puts on, let it be like a band which is round him at all times.
Let this be the reward given to my haters from the Lord, and to those who say evil of my soul.
But, O Lord God, give me your help, because of your name; take me out of danger, because your mercy is good.
For I am poor and in need, and my heart is wounded in me.
I am gone like the shade when it is stretched out: I am forced out of my place like a locust.
My knees are feeble for need of food; there is no fat on my bones.
As for me, they make sport of me; shaking their heads when they see me.
Give me help, O Lord my God; in your mercy be my saviour;
So that they may see that it is the work of your hand; that you, Lord, have done it.
They may give curses but you give blessing; when they come up against me, put them to shame; but let your servant be glad.
Let my haters be clothed with shame, covering themselves with shame as with a robe.
I will give the Lord great praise with my mouth; yes, I will give praise to him among all the people.
For he is ever at the right hand of the poor, to take him out of the hands of those who go after his soul.A Psalm. Of David.
The Lord said to my lord, Be seated at my right hand, till I put all those who are against you under your feet.
The Lord will send out the rod of your strength from Zion; be king over your haters.
Your people give themselves gladly in the day of your power; like the dew of the morning on the holy mountains is the army of your young men.
The Lord has made an oath, and will not take it back. You are a priest for ever, after the order of Melchizedek.
In the day of his wrath kings will be wounded by the Lord at your right hand.
He will be judge among the nations, the valleys will be full of dead bodies; the head over a great country will be wounded by him.
He will take of the stream by the way; so his head will be lifted up.Let the Lord be praised. I will give praise to the Lord with all my heart, among the upright, and in the meeting of the people.
The works of the Lord are great, searched out by all those who have delight in them.
His work is full of honour and glory; and his righteousness is unchanging for ever.
Certain for ever is the memory of his wonders: the Lord is full of pity and mercy.
He has given food to his worshippers; he will keep his agreement in mind for ever.
He has made clear to his people the power of his works, giving them the heritage of the nations.
The works of his hands are faith and righteousness; all his laws are unchanging.
They are fixed for ever and ever, they are done in faith and righteousness.
He has sent salvation to his people; he has given his word for ever: holy is his name and greatly to be feared.
The fear of the Lord is the best part of wisdom: all those who keep his laws are wise: his praise is eternal.Let the Lord be praised. Happy is the man who gives honour to the Lord, and has great delight in his laws.
His seed will be strong on the earth; blessings will be on the generation of the upright.
A store of wealth will be in his house, and his righteousness will be for ever.
For the upright there is a light shining in the dark; he is full of grace and pity.
All is well for the man who is kind and gives freely to others; he will make good his cause when he is judged.
He will not ever be moved; the memory of the upright will be living for ever.
He will have no fear of evil news; his heart is fixed, for his hope is in the Lord.
His heart is resting safely, he will have no fear, till he sees trouble come on his haters.
He has given with open hands to the poor; his righteousness is for ever; his horn will be lifted up with honour.
The sinner will see it with grief; he will be wasted away with envy; the desire of the evil-doers will come to nothing.Let the Lord be praised. O you servants of the Lord, give praise to the name of the Lord.
Let blessing be on the name of the Lord, from this time and for ever.
From the coming up of the sun to its going down, the Lord's name is to be praised.
The Lord is high over all nations, and his glory is higher than the heavens.
Who is like the Lord our God, who is seated on high,
Looking down on the heavens, and on the earth?
He takes the poor man out of the dust, lifting him up from his low position;
To give him a place among the rulers, even with the rulers of his people.
He gives the unfertile woman a family, making her a happy mother of children. Give praise to the Lord.When Israel came out of Egypt, the children of Jacob from a people whose language was strange to them;
Judah became his holy place, and Israel his kingdom.
The sea saw it, and went in flight; Jordan was turned back.
The mountains were jumping like goats, and the little hills like lambs.
What was wrong with you, O sea, that you went in flight? O Jordan, that you were turned back?
You mountains, why were you jumping like goats, and you little hills like lambs?
Be troubled, O earth, before the Lord, before the God of Jacob;
Who made the rock into a water-spring, and the hard stone into a fountain.Not to us, O Lord, not to us, but to your name let glory be given, because of your mercy and your unchanging faith.
Why may the nations say, Where is now their God?
But our God is in heaven: he has done whatever was pleasing to him.
Their images are silver and gold, the work of men's hands.
They have mouths, but no voice; they have eyes, but they see not;
They have ears, but no hearing; they have noses, but no sense of smell;
They have hands without feeling, and feet without power of walking; and no sound comes from their throat.
Those who make them are like them; and so is everyone who puts his faith in them.
O Israel, have faith in the Lord: he is their help and their breastplate.
O house of Aaron, have faith in the Lord: he is their help and their breastplate.
You worshippers of the Lord, have faith in the Lord: he is their help and their breastplate.
The Lord has kept us in mind and will give us his blessing; he will send blessings on the house of Israel and on the house of Aaron.
He will send blessings on the worshippers of the Lord, on the small and on the great.
May the Lord give you and your children still greater increase.
May you have the blessing of the Lord, who made heaven and earth.
The heavens are the Lord's; but the earth he has given to the children of men.
The dead do not give praise to the Lord; or those who go down to the underworld.
But we will give praise to the Lord now and for ever. Praise be to the Lord.I have given my love to the Lord, because he has given ear to the voice of my cry and my prayer.
He has let my request come before him, and I will make my prayer to him all my days.
The nets of death were round me, and the pains of the underworld had me in their grip; I was full of trouble and sorrow.
Then I made my prayer to the Lord, saying, O Lord, take my soul out of trouble.
The Lord is full of grace and righteousness; truly, he is a God of mercy.
The Lord keeps the simple; I was made low, and he was my saviour.
Come back to your rest, O my soul; for the Lord has given you your reward.
You have taken my soul from the power of death, keeping my eyes from weeping, and my feet from falling.
I will go before the Lord in the land of the living.
I still had faith, though I said, I am in great trouble;
Though I said in my fear, All men are false.
What may I give to the Lord for all the good things which he has done for me?
I will take the cup of salvation, and give praise to the name of the Lord.
I will make the offering of my oath to the Lord, even before all his people.
Dear in the eyes of the Lord is the death of his saints.
O Lord, truly I am your servant; I am your servant, the son of her who is your servant; by you have my cords been broken.
I will give an offering of praise to you, and make my prayer in the name of the Lord.
I will make the offerings of my oath, even before all his people;
In the Lord's house, even in Jerusalem. Praise be to the Lord.Let all the nations give praise to the Lord: let all the people give him praise.
For great is his mercy to us, and his faith is unchanging for ever. Praise be to the Lord.O give praise to the Lord, for he is good: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
Let Israel now say, that his mercy is unchanging for ever.
Let the house of Aaron now say, that his mercy is unchanging for ever.
Let all worshippers of the Lord now say, that his mercy is unchanging for ever.
I made my prayer to the Lord in my trouble: and the Lord gave me an answer, and put me in a wide place.
The Lord is on my side; I will have no fear: what is man able to do to me?
The Lord is my great helper: I will see my desire against my haters.
It is better to have faith in the Lord than to put one's hope in man.
It is better to have faith in the Lord than to put one's hope in rulers.
All the nations have come round me; but in the name of the Lord I will have them cut down.
They are round me, yes, they are all about me; but in the name of the Lord I will have them cut down.
They are round me like bees; but they are put out like a fire among thorns; for in the name of the Lord I will have them cut down.
I have been hard pushed by you, so that I might have a fall: but the Lord was my helper.
The Lord is my strength and my song; he has become my salvation.
The sound of joy and salvation is in the tents of the upright; the right hand of the Lord does works of power.
The right hand of the Lord is lifted up; the right hand of the Lord does works of power.
Life and not death will be my part, and I will give out the story of the works of the Lord.
The hand of Jah has been hard on me; but he has not given me up to death.
Let the doors of righteousness be open to me; I will go in and give praise to the Lord.
This is the door of the Lord's house; the workers of righteousness will go in through it.
I will give you praise, for you have given me an answer, and have become my salvation.
The stone which the builders put on one side has become the chief stone of the building.
This is the Lord's doing; it is a wonder in our eyes.
This is the day which the Lord has made; we will be full of joy and delight in it.
Send salvation now, O Lord; Lord, send us your blessing.
A blessing be on him who comes in the name of the Lord; we give you blessing from the house of the Lord.
The Lord is God, and he has given us light; let the holy dance be ordered with branches, even up to the horns of the altar.
You are my God, and I will give you praise; my God, and I will give honour to your name.
O give praise to the Lord, for he is good: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.A Song of the going up.
In my trouble my cry went up to the Lord, and he gave me an answer.
O Lord, be the saviour of my soul from false lips, and from the tongue of deceit.
What punishment will he give you? what more will he do to you, you false tongue?
Sharp arrows of the strong, and burning fire.
Sorrow is mine because I am strange in Meshech, and living in the tents of Kedar.
My soul has long been living with the haters of peace.
I am for peace: but when I say so, they are for war.A Song of the going up.
My eyes are lifted up to the hills: O where will my help come from?
Your help comes from the Lord, who made heaven and earth.
May he not let your foot be moved: no need of sleep has he who keeps you.
See, the eyes of Israel's keeper will not be shut in sleep.
The Lord is your keeper; the Lord is your shade on your right hand.
You will not be touched by the sun in the day, or by the moon at night.
The Lord will keep you safe from all evil; he will take care of your soul.
The Lord will keep watch over your going out and your coming in, from this time and for ever.A Song of the going up. Of David.
I was glad because they said to me, We will go into the house of the Lord.
At last our feet were inside your doors, O Jerusalem.
O Jerusalem, you are like a town which is well joined together;
To which the tribes went up, even the tribes of the Lord, for a witness to Israel, to give praise to the name of the Lord.
For there seats for the judges were placed, even the rulers' seats of the line of David.
O make prayers for the peace of Jerusalem; may they whose love is given to you do well.
May peace be inside your walls, and wealth in your noble houses.
Because of my brothers and friends, I will now say, Let peace be with you.
Because of the house of the Lord our God, I will be working for your good.A Song of the going up.
To you my eyes are lifted up, even to you whose seat is in the heavens.
See! as the eyes of servants are turned to the hands of their masters, and the eyes of a servant-girl to her owner, so our eyes are waiting for the Lord our God, till he has mercy on us.
Have mercy on us, O Lord, have mercy on us: for all men are looking down on us.
For long enough have men of pride made sport of our soul.A Song of the going up. Of David.
If it had not been the Lord who was on our side (let Israel now say);
If it had not been the Lord who was on our side, when men came up against us;
They would have made a meal of us while still living, in the heat of their wrath against us:
We would have been covered by the waters; the streams would have gone over our soul;
Yes, the waters of pride would have gone over our soul.
Praise be to the Lord, who has not let us be wounded by their teeth.
Our soul has gone free like a bird out of the net of those who would take her: the net is broken, and we are free.
Our help is in the name of the Lord, the maker of heaven and earth.A Song of the going up.
Those whose hope is in the Lord are like the mountain of Zion, which may not be moved, but keeps its place for ever.
As the mountains are round about Jerusalem, so the Lord is round about his people, from this time and for ever.
For the rod of sinners will not be resting on the heritage of the upright; so that the upright may not put out their hands to evil.
Do good, O Lord, to those who are good, and to those who are upright in heart.
But as for such as are turned out of the straight way, the Lord will take them away with the workers of evil. Let peace be on Israel.A Song of the going up.
When the Lord made a change in Zion's fate, we were like men in a dream.
Then our mouths were full of laughing, and our tongues gave a glad cry; they said among the nations, The Lord has done great things for them.
The Lord has done great things for us; because of which we are glad.
Let our fate be changed, O Lord, like the streams in the South.
Those who put in seed with weeping will get in the grain with cries of joy.
Though a man may go out weeping, taking his vessel of seed with him; he will come again in joy, with the corded stems of grain in his arms.A Song of the going up. Of Solomon.
If the Lord is not helping the builders, then the building of a house is to no purpose: if the Lord does not keep the town, the watchman keeps his watch for nothing.
It is of no use for you to get up early, and to go late to your rest, with the bread of sorrow for your food; for the Lord gives to his loved ones in sleep.
See, sons are a heritage from the Lord; the fruit of the body is his reward.
Like arrows in the hand of a man of war, are the children of the young.
Happy is the man who has a good store of them; he will not be put to shame, but his cause will be supported by them against his haters.A Song of the going up.
Happy is the worshipper of the Lord, who is walking in his ways.
You will have the fruit of the work of your hands: happy will you be, and all will be well for you.
Your wife will be like a fertile vine in the inmost parts of your house: your children will be like olive plants round your table.
See! this is the blessing of the worshipper of the Lord.
May the Lord send you blessing out of Zion: may you see the good of Jerusalem all the days of your life.
May you see your children's children. Peace be on Israel.A Song of the going up.
Great have been my troubles from the time when I was young (let Israel now say);
Great have been my troubles from the time when I was young, but my troubles have not overcome me.
The ploughmen were ploughing on my back; long were the wounds they made.
The Lord is true: the cords of the evil-doers are broken in two.
Let all the haters of Zion be shamed and turned back.
Let them be like the grass on the house-tops, which is dry before it comes to full growth.
He who gets in the grain has no use for it; and they do not make bands of it for the grain-stems.
And those who go by do not say, The blessing of the Lord be on you; we give you blessing in the name of the Lord.A Song of the going up.
Out of the deep have I sent up my cry to you, O Lord.
Lord, let my voice come before you: let your ears be awake to the voice of my prayer.
O Jah, if you took note of every sin, who would go free?
But there is forgiveness with you, so that you may be feared.
I am waiting for the Lord, my soul is waiting for him, and my hope is in his word.
My soul is watching for the Lord more than those who are watching for the morning; yes, more than the watchers for the morning.
O Israel, have hope in the Lord; for with the Lord is mercy and full salvation.
And he will make Israel free from all his sins.A Song of the going up. Of David.
Lord, there is no pride in my heart and my eyes are not lifted up; and I have not taken part in great undertakings, or in things over-hard for me.
See, I have made my soul calm and quiet, like a child on its mother's breast; my soul is like a child on its mother's breast.
O Israel, have hope in the Lord, from this time and for ever.A Song of the going up.
Lord, give thought to David, and to all his troubles;
How he made an oath to the Lord, and gave his word to the great God of Jacob, saying,
Truly, I will not come into my house, or go to my bed,
I will not give sleep to my eyes, or rest to my eyeballs,
Till I have got a place for the Lord, a resting-place for the great God of Jacob.
We had news of it at Ephrathah: we came to it in the fields of the wood.
Let us go into his tent; let us give worship at his feet.
Come back, O Lord, to your resting-place; you and the ark of your strength.
Let your priests be clothed with righteousness; and let your saints give cries of joy.
Because of your servant David, do not give up your king.
The Lord gave a true oath to David, which he will not take back, saying, I will give your kingdom to the fruit of your body.
If your children keep my word, and the teachings which I will give them, their children will be rulers of your kingdom for ever.
For the Lord's heart is on Zion, desiring it for his resting-place.
This is my rest for ever: here will I ever be; for this is my desire.
My blessing will be on her food; and her poor will be full of bread.
Her priests will be clothed with salvation; and her saints will give cries of joy.
There I will make the horn of David fertile: I have made ready a light for my king.
His haters will be clothed with shame; but I will make his crown shining.A Song of the going up. Of David.
See how good and how pleasing it is for brothers to be living together in harmony!
It is like oil of great price on the head, flowing down over the face, even Aaron's face: coming down to the edge of his robe;
Like the dew of Hermon, which comes down on the mountains of Zion: for there the Lord gave orders for the blessing, even life for ever.A Song of the going up.
Give praise to the Lord, all you servants of the Lord, who take your places in the house of the Lord by night.
Give praise to the Lord, lifting up your hands in his holy place.
May the Lord, who made heaven and earth, send you blessing out of Zion,Let the Lord be praised. O you servants of the Lord, give praise to the name of the Lord.
You who are in the house of the Lord, and in the open spaces of the house of our God,
Give praise to Jah, for he is good: make melody to his name, for it is pleasing.
For the Lord has taken Jacob for himself, and Israel for his property.
I know that the Lord is great, and that our Lord is greater than all other gods.
The Lord has done whatever was pleasing to him, in heaven, and on the earth, in the seas and in all the deep waters.
He makes the mists go up from the ends of the earth; he makes thunder-flames for the rain; he sends out the winds from his store-houses.
He put to death the first-fruits of Egypt, of man and of beast.
He sent signs and wonders among you, O Egypt, on Pharaoh, and on all his servants.
He overcame great nations, and put strong kings to death;
Sihon, king of the Amorites, and Og, king of Bashan, and all the kingdoms of Canaan;
And gave their land for a heritage, even for a heritage to Israel his people.
O Lord, your name is eternal; and the memory of you will have no end.
For the Lord will be judge of his people's cause; his feelings will be changed to his servants.
The images of the nations are silver and gold, the work of men's hands.
They have mouths, but no voice, they have eyes, but they do not see;
They have ears, but no hearing; and there is no breath in their mouths.
Those who make them are like them; and so is everyone who puts his hope in them.
Give praise to the Lord, O children of Israel: give praise to the Lord, O sons of Aaron:
Give praise to the Lord, O sons of Levi: let all the worshippers of the Lord give him praise.
Praise be to the Lord out of Zion, even to the Lord whose house is in Jerusalem, Let the Lord be praised.O give praise to the Lord, for he is good: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
O give praise to the God of gods: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
O give praise to the Lord of lords: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
To him who only does great wonders: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
To him who by wisdom made the heavens: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
To him by whom the earth was stretched out over the waters: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
To him who made great lights: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
The sun to have rule by day: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
The moon and the stars to have rule by night: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
To him who put to death the first-fruits of Egypt: for his mercy is unchanging for ever:
And took out Israel from among them: for his mercy is unchanging for ever:
With a strong hand and an outstretched arm: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
To him who made a way through the Red Sea: for his mercy is unchanging for ever:
And let Israel go through it: for his mercy is unchanging for ever:
By him Pharaoh and his army were overturned in the Red Sea: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
To him who took his people through the waste land: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
To him who overcame great kings: for his mercy is unchanging for ever:
And put noble kings to death: for his mercy is unchanging for ever:
Sihon, king of the Amorites: for his mercy is unchanging for ever:
And Og, king of Bashan: for his mercy is unchanging for ever:
And gave their land to his people for a heritage: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
Even a heritage for his servant Israel: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
Who kept us in mind when we were in trouble: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
And has taken us out of the hands of our haters: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
Who gives food to all flesh: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.
O give praise to the God of heaven: for his mercy is unchanging for ever.By the rivers of Babylon we were seated, weeping at the memory of Zion,
Hanging our instruments of music on the trees by the waterside.
For there those who had taken us prisoners made request for a song; and those who had taken away all we had gave us orders to be glad, saying, Give us one of the songs of Zion.
How may we give the Lord's song in a strange land?
If I keep not your memory, O Jerusalem, let not my right hand keep the memory of its art.
If I let you go out of my thoughts, and if I do not put Jerusalem before my greatest joy, let my tongue be fixed to the roof of my mouth.
O Lord, keep in mind against the children of Edom the day of Jerusalem; how they said, Let it be uncovered, uncovered even to its base.
O daughter of Babylon, whose fate is destruction; happy is the man who does to you what you have done to us.
Happy is the man who takes your little ones, crushing them against the rocks.Of David.
I will give you praise with all my heart: I will make melody to you before the gods.
I will give worship before your holy Temple, praising your name for your mercy and for your unchanging faith: for you have made your word greater than all your name.
When my cry came to your ears you gave me an answer, and made me great with strength in my soul.
All the kings of the earth will give you praise, O Lord, when the words of your mouth come to their ears.
They will make songs about the ways of the Lord; for great is the glory of the Lord.
Though the Lord is high, he sees those who are low; and he has knowledge from far off of those who are lifted up.
Even when trouble is round me, you will give me life; your hand will be stretched out against the wrath of my haters, and your right hand will be my salvation.
The Lord will make all things complete for me: O Lord, your mercy is eternal; do not give up the works of your hands.To the chief music-maker. A Psalm. Of David.
O Lord, you have knowledge of me, searching out all my secrets.
You have knowledge when I am seated and when I get up, you see my thoughts from far away.
You keep watch over my steps and my sleep, and have knowledge of all my ways.
For there is not a word on my tongue which is not clear to you, O Lord.
I am shut in by you on every side, and you have put your hand on me.
Such knowledge is a wonder greater than my powers; it is so high that I may not come near it.
Where may I go from your spirit? how may I go in flight from you?
If I go up to heaven, you are there: or if I make my bed in the underworld, you are there.
If I take the wings of the morning, and go to the farthest parts of the sea;
Even there will I be guided by your hand, and your right hand will keep me.
If I say, Only let me be covered by the dark, and the light about me be night;
Even the dark is not dark to you; the night is as bright as the day: for dark and light are the same to you.
My flesh was made by you, and my parts joined together in my mother's body.
I will give you praise, for I am strangely and delicately formed; your works are great wonders, and of this my soul is fully conscious.
My frame was not unseen by you when I was made secretly, and strangely formed in the lowest parts of the earth.
Your eyes saw my unformed substance; in your book all my days were recorded, even those which were purposed before they had come into being.
How dear are your thoughts to me, O God! how great is the number of them!
If I made up their number, it would be more than the grains of sand; when I am awake, I am still with you.
If only you would put the sinners to death, O God; go far from me, you men of blood.
For they go against you with evil designs, and your haters make sport of your name.
Are not your haters hated by me, O Lord? are not those who are lifted up against you a cause of grief to me?
My hate for them is complete; my thoughts of them are as if they were making war on me.
O God, let the secrets of my heart be uncovered, and let my wandering thoughts be tested:
See if there is any way of sorrow in me, and be my guide in the eternal way.To the chief music-maker. A Psalm. Of David.
O Lord, take me out of the power of the evil man; keep me safe from the violent man:
For their hearts are full of evil designs; and they are ever making ready causes of war.
Their tongues are sharp like the tongue of a snake; the poison of snakes is under their lips. (Selah.)
O Lord, take me out of the hands of sinners; keep me safe from the violent man: for they are designing my downfall.
The men of pride have put secret cords for my feet; stretching nets in my way, so that they may take me with their tricks. (Selah.)
I have said to the Lord, You are my God: give ear, O Lord, to the voice of my prayer.
O Lord God, the strength of my salvation, you have been a cover over my head in the day of the fight.
O Lord, give not the wrongdoer his desire; give him no help in his evil designs, or he may be uplifted in pride. (Selah.)
As for those who come round me, let their heads be covered by the evil of their lips.
Let burning flames come down on them: let them be put into the fire, and into deep waters, so that they may not get up again.
Let not a man of evil tongue be safe on earth: let destruction overtake the violent man with blow on blow.
I am certain that the Lord will take care of the cause of the poor, and of the rights of those who are troubled.
Truly, the upright will give praise to your name: the holy will have a place in your house.A Psalm. Of David.
Lord, I have made my cry to you; come to me quickly; give ear to my voice, when it goes up to you.
Let my prayer be ordered before you like a sweet smell; and let the lifting up of my hands be like the evening offering.
O Lord, keep a watch over my mouth; keep the door of my lips.
Keep my heart from desiring any evil thing, or from taking part in the sins of the evil- doers with men who do wrong: and let me have no part in their good things.
Let the upright give me punishment; and let the god-fearing man put me in the right way; but I will not let the oil of sinners come on my head: when they do evil I will give myself to prayer.
When destruction comes to their judges by the side of the rock, they will give ear to my words, for they are sweet.
Our bones are broken up at the mouth of the underworld, as the earth is broken by the plough.
But my eyes are turned to you, O Lord God: my hope is in you; let not my soul be given up to death.
Keep me from the net which they have put down for me, and from the designs of the workers of evil.
Let the sinners be taken in the nets which they themselves have put down, while I go free.Maschil. Of David. A prayer when he was in the hole of the rock.
The sound of my cry went up to the Lord; with my voice I made my prayer for grace to the Lord.
I put all my sorrows before him; and made clear to him all my trouble.
When my spirit is overcome, your eyes are on my goings; nets have been secretly placed in the way in which I go.
Looking to my right side, I saw no man who was my friend: I had no safe place; no one had any care for my soul.
I have made my cry to you, O Lord; I have said, You are my safe place, and my heritage in the land of the living.
Give ear to my cry, for I am made very low: take me out of the hands of my haters, for they are stronger than I.
Take my soul out of prison, so that I may give praise to your name: the upright will give praise because of me; for you have given me a full reward.A Psalm. Of David.
Let my prayer come to you, O Lord; give ear to my requests for your grace; keep faith with me, and give me an answer in your righteousness;
Let not your servant come before you to be judged; for no man living is upright in your eyes.
The evil man has gone after my soul; my life is crushed down to the earth: he has put me in the dark, like those who have long been dead.
Because of this my spirit is overcome; and my heart is full of fear.
I keep in mind the early days of the past, giving thought to all your acts, even to the work of your hands.
My hands are stretched out to you: my soul is turned to you, like a land in need of water. (Selah.)
Be quick in answering me, O Lord, for the strength of my spirit is gone: let me see your face, so that I may not be like those who go down into the underworld.
Let the story of your mercy come to me in the morning, for my hope is in you: give me knowledge of the way in which I am to go; for my soul is lifted up to you.
O Lord, take me out of the hands of my haters; my soul is waiting for you.
Give me teaching so that I may do your pleasure; for you are my God: let your good Spirit be my guide into the land of righteousness.
Give me life, O Lord, because of your name; in your righteousness take my soul out of trouble.
And in your mercy put an end to my haters, and send destruction on all those who are against my soul; for I am your servant.A Psalm. Of David.
Praise be to the God of my strength, teaching my hands the use of the sword, and my fingers the art of fighting:
He is my strength, and my Rock; my high tower, and my saviour; my keeper and my hope: he gives me authority over my people.
Lord, what is man, that you keep him in mind? or the son of man that you take him into account?
Man is like a breath: his life is like a shade which is quickly gone.
Come down, O Lord, from your heavens: at your touch let the mountains give out smoke.
With your storm-flames send them in flight: send out your arrows for their destruction.
Put out your hand from on high; make me free, take me safely out of the great waters, and out of the hands of strange men;
In whose mouths are false words, and whose right hand is a right hand of deceit.
I will make a new song to you, O God; I will make melody to you on an instrument of ten cords.
It is God who gives salvation to kings; and who kept his servant David from the wounding sword.
Make me free, and take me out of the hands of strange men, in whose mouths are false words, and whose right hand is a right hand of deceit.
Our sons are like tall young plants; and our daughters like the shining stones of a king's house;
Our store-houses are full of all good things; and our sheep give birth to thousands and ten thousands in our fields.
Our oxen are well weighted down; our cows give birth safely; there is no going out, and there is no cry of sorrow in our open places.
Happy is the nation whose ways are so ordered: yes, happy is the nation whose God is the Lord.A Song of praise. Of David.
Let me give glory to you, O God, my King; and blessing to your name for ever and ever.
Every day will I give you blessing, praising your name for ever and ever.
Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised; his power may never be searched out.
One generation after another will give praise to your great acts, and make clear the operation of your strength.
My thoughts will be of the honour and glory of your rule, and of the wonder of your works.
Men will be talking of the power and fear of your acts; I will give word of your glory.
Their sayings will be full of the memory of all your mercy, and they will make songs of your righteousness.
The Lord is full of grace and pity; not quickly angry, but great in mercy.
The Lord is good to all men; and his mercies are over all his works.
Alltheworksofyourhandsgivepraisetoyou, OLord; andyoursaintsgiveyoublessing.
Their words will be of the glory of your kingdom, and their talk of your strength;
So that the sons of men may have knowledge of his acts of power, and of the great glory of his kingdom.
Your kingdom is an eternal kingdom, and your rule is through all generations.
The Lord is the support of all who are crushed, and the lifter up of all who are bent down.
The eyes of all men are waiting for you; and you give them their food in its time.
By the opening of your hand, every living thing has its desire in full measure.
The Lord is upright in all his ways, and kind in all his works.
The Lord is near all those who give honour to his name; even to all who give honour to him with true hearts.
To his worshippers, he will give their desire; their cry comes to his ears, and he gives them salvation.
The Lord will keep all his worshippers from danger; but he will send destruction on all sinners.
My mouth will give praise to the Lord; let all flesh be blessing his holy name for ever and ever.Let the Lord be praised. Give praise to the Lord, O my soul.
While I have breath I will give praise to the Lord: I will make melody to my God while I have my being.
Put not your faith in rulers, or in the son of man, in whom there is no salvation.
Man's breath goes out, he is turned back again to dust; in that day all his purposes come to an end.
Happy is the man who has the God of Jacob for his help, whose hope is in the Lord his God:
Who made heaven and earth, the sea, and all things in them; who keeps faith for ever:
Who gives their rights to those who are crushed down; and gives food to those who are in need of it: the Lord makes the prisoners free;
The Lord makes open the eyes of the blind; the Lord is the lifter up of those who are bent down; the Lord is a lover of the upright;
The Lord takes care of those who are in a strange land; he gives help to the widow and to the child who has no father; but he sends destruction on the way of sinners.
The Lord will be King for ever; your God, O Zion, will be King through all generations. Praise be to the Lord.Give praise to the Lord; for it is good to make melody to our God; praise is pleasing and beautiful.
The Lord is building up Jerusalem; he makes all the outlaws of Israel come together.
He makes the broken-hearted well, and puts oil on their wounds.
He sees the number of the stars; he gives them all their names.
Great is our Lord, and great his power; there is no limit to his wisdom.
The Lord gives help to the poor in spirit; but he sends sinners down in shame.
Make songs of praise to the Lord; make melody to our God with instruments of music.
By his hand the heaven is covered with clouds and rain is stored up for the earth; he makes the grass tall on the mountains.
He gives food to every beast, and to the young ravens in answer to their cry.
He has no delight in the strength of a horse; he takes no pleasure in the legs of a man.
The Lord takes pleasure in his worshippers, and in those whose hope is in his mercy.
Give praise to the Lord, O Jerusalem; give praise to your God, O Zion.
He has made strong the iron bands of your doors; he has sent blessings on your children inside your walls.
He gives peace in all your land, making your stores full of fat grain.
He sends out his orders to the earth; his word goes out quickly.
He gives snow like wool; he sends out ice-drops like dust.
He sends down ice like raindrops: water is made hard by his cold.
At the outgoing of his word, the ice is turned to water; when he sends out his wind, there is a flowing of waters.
He makes his word clear to Jacob, teaching Israel his laws and his decisions.
He has not done these things for any other nation: and as for his laws, they have no knowledge of them. Let the Lord be praised.Give praise to the Lord. Let the Lord be praised from the heavens: give him praise in the skies.
Give praise to him, all you his angels: give praise to him, all his armies.
Give praise to him, you sun and moon: give praise to him, all you stars of light.
Give praise to him, you highest heavens, and you waters which are over the heavens.
Let them give praise to the name of the Lord: for he gave the order, and they were made.
He has put them in their places for ever; he has given them their limits which may not be broken.
Give praise to the Lord from the earth, you great sea-beasts, and deep places:
Fire and rain of ice, snow and mists; storm-wind, doing his word:
Mountains and all hills; fruit-trees and all trees of the mountains:
Beasts and all cattle; insects and winged birds:
Kings of the earth, and all peoples; rulers and all judges of the earth:
Young men and virgins; old men and children:
Let them give glory to the name of the Lord: for his name only is to be praised: his kingdom is over the earth and the heaven.
He has put on high the horn of his people, for the praise of all his saints; even the children of Israel, a people which is near to him. Let the Lord be praised.Let the Lord be praised. Make a new song to the Lord, let his praise be in the meeting of his saints.
Let Israel have joy in his maker; let the children of Zion be glad in their King.
Let them give praise to his name in the dance: let them make melody to him with instruments of brass and corded instruments of music.
For the Lord has pleasure in his people: he gives the poor in spirit a crown of salvation.
Let the saints have joy and glory: let them give cries of joy on their beds.
Let the high praises of God be in their mouths, and a two-edged sword in their hands;
To give the nations the reward of their sins, and the peoples their punishment;
To put their kings in chains, and their rulers in bands of iron;
To give them the punishment which is in the holy writings: this honour is given to all his saints. Praise be to the Lord.Let the Lord be praised. Give praise to God in his holy place: give him praise in the heaven of his power.
Give him praise for his acts of power: give him praise in the measure of his great strength.
Give him praise with the sound of the horn: give him praise with corded instruments of music.
Give him praise with instruments of brass and in the dance: give him praise with horns and corded instruments.
Give him praise with the loud brass: give him praise with the high-sounding brass.
Let everything which has breath give praise to the Lord. Let the Lord be praised.